Alphinaud: The question is, how will the Empire respond to the disappearance of Omega and the primal…

Alphinaud: Oh, I didn’t see you there. Forgive me. Word from Baelsar’s Wall is proving long in the coming, and my mind cannot help but stray to grim places.

Tataru: Alphinaud! A message from the Alliance!

Alphinaud: It’s about time! Pray summon the others at once.

Tataru: Yes, sir!

Alphinaud: …General Aldynn reports that his forces have secured the breach in Baelsar’s Wall.

Y’shtola: And what of the primal and Omega?

Alphinaud: There is still no sign of either at this time. He writes that they will begin a more thorough investigation shortly…

Alphinaud: And, as expected, he wishes to petition the aid of the Scions of the Seventh Dawn.

Lyse: As expected?

Alphinaud: The Alliance’s decision to capture a part of Baelsar’s Wall is…open to interpretation.

Alisaie: The Wall serves to demarcate imperial territory, Ala Mhigo included, from the rest of Eorzea.

Alisaie: To an observer, the Alliance’s actions could be seen as a prelude to invasion.

Alphinaud: Indeed. And the Alliance leaders have no wish to be branded invaders.

Lyse: You’re saying they won’t fight for Ala Mhigo? Even after everything that’s happened?

Alphinaud: Not without the consent of her people, no. Make no mistake, Lyse─the Alliance is in complete agreement that the Empire must be purged from Eorzea.

Alphinaud: However, they will not set foot in Gyr Abania until they have formally secured the consent and cooperation of the Ala Mhigan opposition.

Y’shtola: …They would have us act as intermediaries?

Alphinaud: Precisely. The Scions are uniquely qualified to serve in this capacity─that is to say, Lyse is, given her personal connection to the Resistance.

Alphinaud: Who better than you to broker an agreement between the Alliance and the people of Ala Mhigo? …Assuming you are willing, of course?

Lyse: Of course I am. You know I’d like nothing more!

Alphinaud: As for who should accompany you on said diplomatic mission…I had a mind to volunteer myself.

Lyse: Well, that covers the talking part. But you just know there’ll be trouble along the way. Are you available?

Lyse: Thanks. It means a lot, knowing you’ll be there.

Y’shtola: I too shall accompany you. Such endeavors are seldom hampered by a surfeit of healers.

Krile: Good point! Allow me to offer my services as well.

 Alisaie: I have spent quite enough time here of late, so I’ll be coming, but we will need someone to keep an eye on things.

Alisaie: I trust you have no objections?

Urianger: None, my lady. Gladly shall I continue to serve as caretaker of the Waking Sands, and there keep watch for signs of primal and Ascian activity both.

 Thancred: As capable as my learned friend undoubtedly is, there are some troubles that may prove too much for a single Scion─on account of which, I mean to stay.

Alphinaud: It is settled, then. Let us each see to our preparations.

 

[Packing and whatnot.]

 

Alphinaud: Ready, my friend?

Alphinaud: Well, then. Tataru─I leave the Rising Stones in your capable hands.

Tataru: Don’t worry, Alphinaud! I’ll see that the place is still standing when you come back!

 Yugiri: Mistress Y’shtola has unfolded all. You are bound for Gyr Abania?

Alphinaud: Aye. The Alliance would have us make contact with the Ala Mhigan Resistance as soon as possible.

Yugiri: It begins, then─as soon it shall in Doma, if the gods are good. ‘Tis but a pity that it must be now. I am sorry that we shall not be present to fight beside you in the battles to come…

Alphinaud: You have stood with us countless times, Lady Yugiri. Pray do not apologize.

Yugiri: Then let us thank you instead. You and yours stood with us from the first, when we came to this land as refugees in search of sanctuary.

Yugiri: Loath am I to think what might have become of my people had you not extended to us the hand of friendship. We will never forget─this I solemnly swear.

Alphinaud: Much has changed since first you set foot on these shores. Revenant’s Toll stands as a testament to that. I am sure your people will manage in your absence.

Yugiri: Indeed. They have built a new home for themselves, and no longer need me to shepherd them. The time has come for Gosetsu and I to return to our master─to our home.

Lyse: I know how you feel. It’s time I went home too…

Gosetsu: Though our battlefields be a thousand malms apart, our purpose is one! Let all men hearken to the clarion call of freedom─of liberation─from Eorzea to the Far East, that they may rise up and cast down the curs of Garlemald!

Lyse: Take care, you hear me? When all of this is over, we’re going to celebrate─together─just you wait!

Yugiri: I should like that very much. Fare you well.

Alphinaud: A thousand malms apart, yet united in purpose… Let us pray both our endeavors meet with success. Shall we, then?

Tataru: Wait, wait, not just yet! I knew I’d forgotten something important! Lyse, could you come with me?

Lyse: …Me? What, now? Um…all right, then. If you insist…

 

[Tataru has made a new outfit for Lyse.]

 

Lyse: Heh heh heh… What do you think?

Tataru: As you can see, I designed it to be light and loose─an outfit tailor-made to the needs of a skilled fighter like Lyse.

Alphinaud: Your work never ceases to impress. Much more of this, and I may have to stop introducing you as the Scion’s receptionist and start referring to you as our preeminent seamstress…

Lyse: It’s lovely, Tataru. Thank you. I feel like I could take on a legion…

Tataru: I’m glad you like it. And with that, I’ll delay you no longer. Safe travels!

Alphinaud: Then onward, to Gyr Abania! Our first stop will be at Amarissaix’s Spire, in the East Shroud

 

[In the East Shroud]

 

Raubahn: Greetings, Scions. On behalf of the Eorzean Alliance, I welcome you to Castrum Oriens.

Alphinaud: Thank you, General. We were relieved to hear that your forces secured the Wall without incident. Have the imperials made any attempt to retake the castrum since then?

Raubahn: None. Save for a few skirmishes between our scouts and their patrols, we’ve had barely any contact with them. But we all know it’s only a matter of time before things escalate.

Raubahn: As if attacking Baelsar’s Wall weren’t enough, Ilberd summoned a primal right on their doorstep─and Garlemald is not like to let such shows of defiance go unanswered.

Alphinaud: ‘Twas a declaration of war, even if it was not Ilberd’s to make. And now we are bound by it, for weal or for woe. The Scions stand ready to serve, General. What would you ask of us?

Raubahn: As stated in my message, the Alliance will not proceed without the support and cooperation of the Ala Mhigan people. We would have you serve as our emissaries and make contact with the Resistance.

Lyse: Consider it done, General. We won’t let you down, I swear.

Raubahn: Then I’ll leave you to it. Godsspeed!

Cid: Hah! Of all the castra in all the world, you walk into mine.

Alphinaud: Master Garlond! What brings you here?

Cid: A certain missing Allagan weapon and draconic primal. Omega and─Shinryu, I think the shinobi called it? Anyway, we’ve been studying their trail of destruction, hoping it might lead us somewhere─which it has singularly failed to do.

Raubahn: Then ’tis like Omega fell to earth in occupied territory…meaning it may already be in imperial hands.

Cid: Even so, it bears repeating that we engaged the stasis systems. Assuming the command was received and executed successfully, the weapon will be of no use to them. Assuming. We should hurry up and find it, regardless.

Raubahn: All the more reason to reach out to the Resistance. If we want to press on into Gyr Abania, we’ll need their blessing.

Lyse: Everyone’s counting on us. Let’s not waste any more time talking!

Lyse: I learned a route that should allow us to avoid imperial patrols. Stick with me and we’ll be there before you know it!

[Past Baelsar’s Wall at last.]

Lyse: I don’t see any soldiers. Good. Let’s cross.

Lyse: You’re wondering about the tower to the south?

Lyse: It’s part of Castellum Velodyna. That’s what the imperials decided to call the old bridge after they fortified it.

Lyse: I call it a great big eyesore. Honestly, you can see that rotten banner from absolutely malms away. <sigh> They never miss a chance to rub our noses in it, do they… Come on, we should keep moving.

[We keep moving.]

Lyse: We’re here. On the other side of this pass is Rhalgr’s Reach.

Alphinaud: So you say, but all I see are rocks. I presume there is some sort of trick to this?

Y’shtola: …Indeed. A glamour.

Lyse: Good eye, Y’shtola!

Alphinaud: I take it they have a talented mage in their ranks─or mayhap an artificer trained in the modification of glamour prisms…?

Lyse: Something like that. The important thing is that it fools the Garleans.

Lyse: Oh, before we go in─I don’t know if Tataru told you, but my friend Naago, the messenger who came to the Rising Stones, is a member of this faction.

 Lyse: So they know us, and they shouldn’t attack us on sight. That said, they can be a bit jumpy, so let me lead the way, and, uh…don’t go reaching for your weapons or anything.

 Lyse: And with a sprinkle of demasking dust, all is laid bare!

[The glamour dissolves, revealing the way through] 

[Lyse narrates: “I remember crossing the border. Standing in Gyr Abania once more. Me and my fellow Scions…the Warrior of Light among us. Behind us, Baelsar’s Wall, cutting the land in two. Freedom on one side, tyranny on the other. Tyranny…and the promise of a new beginning. But one that could only be bought with flames and blood.”]

[In Rhalgr’s Reach]

 Conrad: You’ll forgive us our precautions, but we couldn’t be sure who had crossed the barrier. We see you now for who you are, though─the Scions of the Seventh Dawn.

Conrad: Now, I know you would not have come all this way unless you had something important to discuss, and I’m eager to hear what it is you have to say…

Conrad: But let’s not do this on our doorstep, eh? Come with me.

[Lyse narrates: “I remember the old stories. How the breaker of worlds came down from on high and cleft the earth with a single blow. Rhalgr’s Reach. A holy place, and a fitting home for the Resistance. For the brave and the true, the loyal sons and daughters of Ala Mhigo. They were waiting for us there. Men and women whose souls still cried out for what was lost. For what could be ours again.”]

Conrad: Allow me to welcome you once more to Rhalgr’s Reach, our humble headquarters.

Conrad: My name is Conrad Kemp, and I have the dubious honor of overseeing operations here.

 Alphinaud: It is a pleasure to meet you, Master Kemp. I am Alphinaud Leveilleur, of the Scions of the Seventh Dawn, as are my comrades.

 Alphinaud: Before I speak of our purpose here, pray allow me to thank you for sheltering Yda─forgive me─Lyse and Papalymo at great risk to yourselves.

Conrad: Now, now, there’s no need for that. They risked their necks for us enough times. ‘Twas the least we could do.

Lyse: I-I wanted to… I mean, about the mask and…

Conrad: Ahhh, don’t fret over that. You’re not the first person to take up arms against the Empire under a false name. We’d do the same if we had any sense….My condolences for your loss, child.

Lyse: …Papalymo laid down his life to save us─to give us a chance to make a better future for ourselves.

Lyse: There will never be a better time to drive the Garleans from our lands. But we have to take the lead on this─we can’t leave it to fanatics like Ilberd.

Conrad: More than a few of our people were taken in by his promises. Followed him all the way to the Wall. Good men and women who never came back.

Conrad: When M’naago told us what had happened─how the bastard had made sacrifices of them for his twisted ritual─by Rhalgr, it filled me with an unholy fury… But what’s done is done. Best we can do now is see that it wasn’t all in vain.

Alphinaud: That is why we are here today, sir─to see that some good comes of this tragedy.

Alphinaud: On behalf of the Eorzean Alliance, we do hereby extend a formal offer of military assistance to the Ala Mhigan Resistance.

Conrad: Do you, now? Well, go on then. I’m sure there’s more to it than that.

 [Alphinaud explains]

 Conrad: …So that’s the way of it, eh? The Alliance, hoping to avoid a direct confrontation with the superior forces of the Empire, wishes to engage them by proxy with our vastly inferior ones?

Conrad: My comrades and I must confer on your proposal. A moment, if you please…

Alphinaud: Of course, Master Kemp. Take all the time you require.

Alphinaud: So…it would seem we find ourselves with a surfeit of free time─

Conrad: Ah, forgive me. You are free to look around Rhalgr’s Reach. In fact, I would encourage you to do so. It’ll give you a better grasp of our current circumstances.

Alphinaud: Thank you, Master Kemp. I believe we will do just that.

Alphinaud: Let us make the most of this opportunity and assess the Resistance’s capabilities.

Alisaie: Free to poke our noses wheresoever we will, eh? I like the sound of that.

Lyse: Well, I already know this place inside out. I can show you around if you like, Auric?

Lyse: Great! Let’s get started.

Lyse: I’ll bet you think the Resistance is mostly made up of Ala Mhigan Highlanders like me, but the truth is that we don’t even account for half.

Lyse: We’ve got Hellsguard from all the way over by the Spine in here, and plenty of Seekers of the Sun like Naago.

Lyse: There’s even some beastmen─well, beastwomen, I suppose─like that one over there. She’s an Ananta. They’ve been with us for a while now.

Lyse: Well, one of the smaller factions has. The rest won’t have anything to do with us. We’re no different from the Garleans to them.

Lyse: They keep to themselves, spending all their time crafting. Ananta make the most amazing jewelry, by the way. They use magicks to twist metals and crystal into shapes you wouldn’t believe. It’s a pity people hardly ever get to see their work. But then most don’t even know they exist.

Lyse: That’s enough about them, anyway. Let’s take a closer look at the statue of Rhalgr, shall we?

Lyse: Pretty awe-inspiring, isn’t it? The breaker of worlds, who guided our ancestors to these lands all those centuries ago.

Lyse: Yda used to tell me the story on stormy nights. She wanted me to understand. To remember…

Lyse: “At the end of the Fifth Astral Era, when the waters rose higher and higher, people all across Eorzea beseeched the heavens for a sign. And lo, a burning star appeared in the eastern sky, and led the way to these mountains of Gyr Abania…“

Lyse: “They who were saved by His grace pledged to honor and revere Him. To devote themselves to great works without and within…”

Lyse: “A storm of blood approaches fast,

Hells open, Heavens weep.

For no one soul doth lie beyond

The measure of His Reach.”

Lyse: That last part was inscribed on this stone by a monk of the Fist of Rhalgr. Yda explained it to me.

Lyse: “A day will come bringing strife and sorrow that none may escape. Waste not these precious hours, but in quiet preparation make strong the body and mind.”

Lyse: I don’t know if that “storm of blood” is finally upon us. But if it is, I have to believe that everything we’ve been through, everything that has led us to this point, will see us through in the end.

Lyse: …Agh! Sorry. That was all a bit melodramatic, wasn’t it? Let’s keep moving, shall we? Off to the infirmary!

Lyse: This is the infirmary, as you can probably tell. Here’s where the Resistance healers patch up the wounded and tend to the sick.

Lyse: No matter how carefully we planned our operations, casualties were inevitable. It’s a sad thing to think about, but…it’s also important to remember the cost, as Conrad would say.

Lyse: We should go. I’ll show you the Aetheryte Plaza next.

Lyse: When you’ve seen one aetheryte, you’ve seen them all, right? Not quite. This one’s an older design, dating back decades, to when the Fist of Rhalgr was still here.

Lyse: It may look a little different, but it works just as well as any other. I’ll show you where the sutlers are next─but don’t forget to attune to the aetheryte before we go!

Alisaie: Come to take the measure of our friendly neighborhood merchants?

Alisaie: They’re a bold lot, that much is plain. If the imperials found out they were peddling their wares to the Resistance, they would be lucky to escape with their lives.

Alphinaud: ‘Tis a gamble, aye, and I admire their courage. But their motives could hardly be said to be altruistic…

M’naago: Ah, here you are. I’ve been looking all over for you.

M’naago: We’ve finished discussing your proposal, and we’re ready to receive you all back at the tent.

M’naago: I’ve sent someone to fetch Y’shtola and Krile, so if you’d like to follow me…

Conrad: Thank you all for waiting. We have reached a consensus.

Conrad: I, Conrad Kemp, do hereby accept the Eorzean Alliance’s proposal. You must understand, however, that our cooperation comes with certain caveats.

Alphinaud: Those caveats being…?

Conrad: I take no joy in this, just so you know. Were it within my power, I’d offer you more assistance.

Conrad: But the Resistance is far more fragmented than you realize. The men and women in my care belong to but one of many factions.

Conrad: Simply put, I can only speak for the people of Rhalgr’s Reach.

Conrad: Now, I have every intention of appealing to the others, and I expect many will agree─but it will take time, and I cannot guarantee universal support.

Alphinaud: Understood. I shall see that the Alliance is under no misapprehensions as to your position.

Conrad: Much obliged…but that’s not the whole of it. As you can imagine, the loss of those who cast their lot with the Griffin left us short on numbers.

Conrad: Some of our most trusted veterans died at the Wall, and we’ve had to fill their posts with the young and inexperienced. Frankly, everything’s in a right bloody mess.

Lyse: Oh, we’d be more than happy to help you get back on your feet. If we’re going to work together, we’ll be doing ourselves a favor!

Conrad: Well, there’s no shortage of work to be done, that’s for sure. We’re in dire need of new blood too.

Krile: Y’shtola and I could lend a hand in the infirmary. From what I saw, they could do with a few more healers.

Alphinaud: Very well. I for my part shall return to the Rising Stones. I am certain there are others among the Scions who would welcome the opportunity to fight for Ala Mhigan liberation.

Lyse: Um… Is there anything else we can do to help?

Conrad: I had something else in mind for you lot. M’naago and Meffrid will tell you more.

Lyse: Understood. We won’t let you down.

Alisaie: Right, then. M’naago and Meffrid are to be our keepers.

Alisaie: Knowing naught of what they require, one task is as good as the other. Make your choice, Auric.

[What do you need, M’naago?]

 M’naago: Before we begin, I’d like to thank you and the Scions again for patching me up after I bled all over your floor. I owe you my life, and I won’t forget that.

M’naago: Furthermore, it was rude of me to run off without saying a word. It’s all well and good me claiming my duties here couldn’t wait, but a parting thank-you was the very least you deserved. My apologies.

M’naago: And…thank you. Now, to business.

M’naago: Commander Kemp’s entrusted me with a formal reply to be hand-delivered to the Alliance leadership. It covers everything we discussed, as well as detailing the disposition of our forces.

M’naago: What I need is an escort─one or two men at most, so we can make it to the Wall swiftly and without attracting undue attention.

Alisaie: Very well. I shall join you in this.

Alisaie: General Aldynn commands the forces at Castrum Oriens. It should be simple enough to see it into his hands.

M’naago: Great! That’s just what I wanted to hear! When you’re ready to depart, meet me at the pass leading out of the Reach.

[And what’s up with Meffrid?]

 Meffrid: At the risk of repeating myself, it’s still hard for me to believe that we’d meet again here, of all places… Though I reckon you probably don’t remember me after all this time, eh?

 [Nope]

 Meffrid: No, no, ’twas a lifetime ago. There is no need to apologize. But know that down in Quarrymill, we didn’t forget about you─nor the lives you saved.

Meffrid: As for me…I went to Little Ala Mhigo while Gallien was recovering. Gundobald was my former commander and an old friend, and I had a lot on my mind…

Meffrid: In the end, I decided to disband our unit. I told the men to live their lives as they saw fit. Some chose to remain in Little Ala Mhigo, and others went to Ul’dah for work.

Meffrid: But, as you can see, I chose to come back to Gyr Abania and join Conrad and the others.

Meffrid: I’ve kept busy since then, ferrying people and provisions across the border and back. It’s not been easy, but it’s been fulfilling.

 Meffrid: Today, however, we’ll be heading east into the Peaks. Conrad thinks we might have luck finding new recruits in the village of Ala Gannha.

Lyse: Ala Gannha!? If you’re going there, you’re taking me with you!

Meffrid: Ah, that’s right─you’re from Ala Gannha, aren’t you, Lyse? By all means, we’d welcome the company.

Meffrid: There’ll be more to it than just asking around, but we can talk about it on the way. Make your preparations and meet me by the tunnel to the Peaks.

[Okay Meffrid first.]

[With Meffrid –  Ala Gannha]

Meffrid: This tunnel will take us all the way to the Peaks.

Meffrid: We’re on a mission for Conrad to Ala Gannha. Clear the barricade, if you would.

Gilow: Aye, sir. Shouldn’t take more than a moment.

Meffrid: There’re more villages there than out here─but also more imperials keeping a close eye on things. We’ll need to tread carefully…

 [Lyse narrates: “I remember the peaks of Gyr Abania. Silent watchmen that would stand long after we were gone. We came seeking allies to join us in the fight against the Empire. People who had had enough. People who had suffered every possible indignity. Who had been treated like animals, day after day after day….]

Meffrid: We’ve a glamour in place here too, as you may have noticed. So far as the imperials are concerned, this is naught more than a testament to the savage impulses of a lesser race…

Meffrid: Remember, though: once we leave these ruins, we’ll have no glamours to conceal us. The village is to the east; keep watch for patrols as we move.

Meffrid: Nary an imperial in sight. That’s a mercy.

Meffrid: Ala Gannha’s due east, past that bridge. Follow me, it’s not much further.

Meffrid: You can rest easy─we made it. This is Ala Gannha.

Lyse: It feels strange coming home like this. I always imagined it would be… Oh, sorry. That has nothing to do with why we’re here. We need recruits.

Meffrid: Aye, we do, but as I said back at the Reach, it’s a little more complicated than just asking for volunteers these days.

Meffrid: As you know, we’re shorthanded because many of our people were taken in by the Griffin’s promises and went to the Wall, never to return. It wasn’t just them, though─folks from all over, including some of my former comrades, answered his call to arms.

Meffrid: As for why we came to this particular village… It’s rumored that Ala Gannha lost a few youths as well.

Meffrid: If there’s truth to that, then there could be others sympathetic to the cause. Then again, after the Griffin’s betrayal, they may be suspicious of outsiders claiming allegiance to the Resistance─and rightfully so.

Lyse: So with all that in mind, how are we supposed to convince them to join? I mean, I knew it wouldn’t be as simple as giving a speech in the village square─

Meffrid: Not if you didn’t want the place to be burned to the ground, no. You might as well piss in the viceroy’s eye. We’ll need to be a good deal more circumspect than that. You never know when an imperial spy is listening.

Meffrid: We must speak with the elder first. I know for a fact he can be trusted. We’ll listen to what he has to say and decide what to do after.

Lyse: Sounds like a plan! Let’s hope there are still some brave men and women here willing to fight.

Meffrid: Raganfrid, the village elder, is over by the shore. No time like the present─let’s have a word.

Raganfrid: …Don’t know you, traveler. You a merchant? You’ll not find much custom here.

Meffrid: Greetings and well met, elder, and sincerest apologies that I did not send word ahead of our arrival. Too long have I been away from Ala Gannha, and I would know of your recent troubles.

Raganfrid: Ah, you are comrades of Meffrid. I see, I see…

Raganfrid: Speak on, though I suspect I know your purpose.

Meffrid: The Griffin came with many men, and left with many more. Such is the rumor. Is it true?

Raganfrid: He lit a fire in their hearts and then dangled a dream before their tired eyes. And now you come to steal away what few remain.

Meffrid: The Griffin was a traitor and a madman, and we had no part in his schemes. We have made an agreement with the Alliance─this time it will be different!

Raganfrid: This time? This time!? Cold comfort to the dead and the ones they left behind! How much more must we give before you’ve had your fill?

Meffrid: But…but surely you hate the Empire as much as we do!?

Raganfrid: They took our lands, our traditions, even our god. And they demand a fifth of what little we’ve got left. Aye, I hate the bastards. With every fiber of my being.

Raganfrid: But hate’s not enough, Meffrid. I can’t…we can’t keep doing this. I’ll not tell anyone you came, but you need to go. Now. Leave us be, and never return.

Lyse: You’ve got no right to speak to us like that─

Raganfrid: I’ve got a quarry that was producing barely enough to keep us fed, and that was before half our young men and women went off to die for your bloody cause!

Raganfrid: So yes, I’ve got every right to tell you to leave my village!

Lyse: …No. You don’t. Because it’s my village too. My home!

Raganfrid: What in the hells are you on about─

Raganfrid: Wait… I know those eyes. You’re one of Curtis’s girls!

Lyse: Lyse. Lyse Hext. And I’m here…I’m here to take back my homeland.

Raganfrid: By Rhalgr, the last time I saw you, you were… I didn’t even know if you were still alive… And I never thought you would come─

Lyse: I almost didn’t. And my sister never will. Lots of others won’t either…and that’s why we’ve got to carry on the fight.

Raganfrid: You even sound like him… <sigh> As you say, I’ve got no right to tell you to leave. Ala Gannha is as much your home as it is mine.

Raganfrid: But I say to you again

Lyse: Yes, I heard you the first time.

Lyse: Let’s go.

Meffrid: That could’ve been handled better, but what’s done is done. At least we’ve been granted permission to stay.

Meffrid: I was hoping Raganfrid might help us to recruit some of his people, but that clearly isn’t going to happen. If we’re to convince any of them to join, we’ll first need to regain their trust.

Meffrid: It’s risky, and it’s hardly subtle, but I say we approach the villagers directly─see what problems they’ve got, and if we can do anything to help.

Lyse: Makes sense to me. Let’s split up and ask around.

[Asking around]

Angry Coeurl: A new face in Ala Gannha? Huh… What would you ask of me, then?

Angry Coeurl: A stranger and a generous soul besides? Bollocks. There’s naught more suspicious than a good samaritan.

Angry Coeurl: …On the other hand, if you were an imperial agent, I expect you’d go about your business with more discretion. Bugger me, you really are here to help, aren’t you?

Angry Coeurl: Very well. I’ll take you up on your offer, stranger…My little brother’s working the rocks by Grymm & Enid. He’s got something for me. Can you go and get it?

Angry Coeurl: Right, then. Frightened Coeurl is his name. Ask him for the leftovers─he ought to understand.

[Up at the quarry.]

 Frightened Coeurl: Hm? Here for the leftovers, are you? Not like my brother to send someone in his stead, but so be it.

Frightened Coeurl: It’s all in the sacks over yonder. They’re bleedin’ heavy, mind, so be careful when you pick ’em up.

[Back to town.]

 Angry Coeurl: Ah, the new face. You have my leftovers?

Angry Coeurl: Huh, well I’ll be…you actually went and brought the whole lot. Much obliged, much obliged…

Angry Coeurl: It’s saltpeter for making firesand, in case you’re curious what it’s all for. The rocks by the lakes’ve got good deposits.

Angry Coeurl: ‘Tain’t hard for my brother to pass for any other another plodding quarryman, all the while sweeping bits and pieces off to the side, to bundle up and sell to the sutlers what trade with the Resistance.

Angry Coeurl: It’s a living, and a way of fighting back besides. Our way of spitting in the Garleans’ eye for putting our father in an imperial uniform and shipping him off to some faraway province fifteen years ago.

Angry Coeurl: Dunno if he’s dead or alive, even. Though, if he were alive, he’d not be long for this world if we were caught fighting for the Resistance. So this is the best we can do.

Angry Coeurl: …That’s the long and the short of it. We do what we can, though we know it’s not enough.

Angry Coeurl: I think you’ll find that most folks here ain’t much different. Everybody’s got a reason, but in the end, the result is the same.

Angry Coeurl: I suppose I just…I just wanted you to know, is all. That I─that we know why you’re here, and that even if we can’t join you, we…we wish we could…

[Next?]

 Griseldis: You’d best keep your distance, if you know what’s good for you. Say your piece and move on.

Griseldis: Looking for folks down on their luck? Congratulations, you’ve found one. As you can see, my leg ain’t what it used to be. Some days I can hardly walk for the pain.

Griseldis: Mornings are the worst, especially after cold nights. Hard labor’s right out─too much pain and trouble for others.

Griseldis: There’s a tea what helps with it, though…I’d need to grind chapuli horns and hornbill claws for the blend…

Griseldis: Eh? You’ll go and get some for me, just like that? You needn’t trouble yourself so…

[Got the ingredients.]

 Griseldis: You’ve been gone a while. What brings you back to Ala Gannha?

Griseldis: Oh, I never meant to… I mean, in times like these, you never think people will actually…

Griseldis: This country’s hard on people, but it’s not just that. The imperials, they…they’ve made it known I’m not to be helped. A dead man’s good for one lesson, you know, whereas a live one…

Griseldis: You’re with the Resistance, right? I suppose there’s no reason not to tell you then.

Griseldis: My father, gods rest his soul, was deathly sick at the time, and so I’d gone out into the forest, spear in hand, to gather herbs. And then I had the good fortune to run into an imperial patrol.

Griseldis: My weapon marked me as a rebel, or so they said. Not that it’d’ve made a difference if I’d fought back. I knew what the lot of them were about the moment that centurion laid eyes on me…

Griseldis: Didn’t matter in the end, of course. Some people just like to hurt others. And by the time I limped back to the hut, it was too late for my father.

Griseldis: Too late for me too, aye, and many others I imagine. Help them too if you like─they’ll be grateful and say thank you. But beyond that, I wouldn’t hope for much.

 Meffrid: Ah, there you are, Auric. I’ve been trying to help the villagers deal with this food shortage of theirs.

Meffrid: Recently, the imperials have been swooping into villages unannounced and seizing supplies in order to prevent the people from stockpiling, in case they might be in league with the Resistance.

 Meffrid: It’s not much, but I’ve taught them a few tricks to better hide what little they’ve got left. How’s Lyse getting on, by the way? You’d think people would be more inclined to trust a local girl─assuming they remember her, that is…

[Lyse appears to be having an argument with someone.]

 Lyse: N-No, I didn’t mean to…

Cynical Youth: …And where were you these past twenty years!? Where were you when we were being ground under the Black Wolf’s boot!? On the other side of his bastard wall, living the high life, I’ll wager!

Lyse: That’s not fair!

Cynical Youth: Ho, and who’s this, another one of your freedom-loving friends, deigning to help us poor unfortunate souls?

Cynical Youth: Trying to whip us into a frenzy so we’ll go and storm a castrum with our pickaxes and shovels!? Leave, all of you, before you bring a cohort down on us all!

Cynical Youth: And you─don’t you dare speak like you’re one of us. You can’t even begin to understand what we’ve been through. You weren’t here, Lyse! You weren’t here!

Cynical Youth: This is my home, and I love it with all my heart. And if you truly have any love for it too, you’ll keep us out of your doomed rebellion.

Lyse: …He has a point. No matter what I say or do, it doesn’t change the fact I left them behind.

Lyse: But this isn’t about me, or anyone else. It’s about Ala Mhigo. Let’s go and find Meffrid.

[We found Meffrid.]

 Meffrid: Looks like the elder wasn’t the only one unwilling to hear us out. Can’t blame them, given what happened at the Wall.

Lyse: I thought I might be able to appeal to them as a fellow…I don’t know. But, if anything, it just made them angrier. I haven’t lived through it like they have.

Meffrid: I can’t claim to know the struggle like they do either, Lyse. I ran too, aye, but if I hadn’t, I’d’ve never met Auric or the rest of you, and we might not be here today, in a position to make a difference.

Meffrid: So I don’t regret my choices, nor will I apologize for them. There’s more than one way to fight.

Flustered Woman: Help! Someone, anyone─we need help!

Meffrid: I don’t like the sound of that one bit. Come on.

Flustered Woman: Wercrata, he… <pant> <pant> …the tributum and…and the bloody ratmen, they… <pant> <pant> Damn it all!

Meffrid: You there─take a deep breath, and then tell us what happened.

Flustered Woman: It was all business as usual… The tributum’s due soon, and we were taking it to the imperials when the Qiqirn attacked! They took my brother, and our money!

Lyse: Took him where?

Flustered Woman: Ruins to the south of here. Was just an old temple before they came and… Listen, Wercrata’s the only family I’ve got left! If I lose him, I─

Cynical Youth: The Ziggurat? If the ratmen took him there, he’s as good as dead…

Lyse: We’ve got to get after them! If there’s even a chance her brother is still alive, we have to try!

 Meffrid: So Wercrata’s being held somewhere at the Ziggurat to the south, which has been taken over by a host of Qiqirn bandits. That about covers it, then.

Meffrid: Be prepared for a fight. They may not be the most challenging foes, but there’s sure to be a lot of them.

[At the Ziggurat]

 ???: Please, let me go! I’m begging you! I don’t want to die!

Meffrid: Hear that? I think it came from the top of the Ziggurat!

Qiqirn Bandit: Who dares come to loot our man-flesh! Ours to eat! Ours to eat!

Meffrid: We knew it’d come to this. Kill them quick, before they alert the others!

[Got it.]

 Wercrata: By Rhalgr, what did I ever do to deserve this? I’ve gone to bed hungry for months. I’m skin and bones! I’d hardly make a snack, much less a meal…

Lyse: Oh, you found him!

Wercrata: W-Wait…are you here to rescue me?

Lyse: Your sister sent us. It’s going to be all right.

Wercrata: My sister? Oh, Rhalgr be praised, she’s safe! And you…you lot fought your way in here just for me? To think there are still good, brave folk in this world…

Meffrid: We should go before the Qiqirn return in force. Do you still have the tributum?

Wercrata: Oh gods, the tributum! The imperials will be wondering where I am! I have to go!

Lyse: What, right now? In your condition?

Wercrata: You don’t understand─we were given a warning last month for being short! If I don’t make it in time, there’s no telling what will happen to me and my sister!

Lyse: I’m glad we saved him, but seeing him run off like that… I’ve got a bad feeling about this.

Lyse: Listen, Auric, Meffrid… I think we need to go after Wercrata.

Meffrid: Wait─you had better not be thinking of stopping him! You heard what he said─if they don’t pay one way, they’ll pay another!

Lyse: I know that, I do, and I don’t want to interfere! I just…I just want to see that he makes it there safely.

Meffrid: …If that’s the sum of it, then fine. Let’s head down and see if we can’t pick up his trail.

[I found a chocobo feather.]

 Lyse: Any luck?

Meffrid: A chocobo feather, is it? Aye, by my reckoning, it came from Wercrata’s bird, in which case…

Meffrid: There’s a collapsed bridge just around the bend. Hug the rocks and stick to the shadows. We’ll find him soon enough.

 Meffrid: Any minute now, I expect he’ll come thundering round the bend and─ Hear that? Get to cover, quickly now!

Lyse: Are they imperials?

 Meffrid: Worse. Skulls. Listen, Lyse─whatever happens, stay hidden and do not intervene. Understood?

Lyse: What?

Skull Swordsman: You there─halt! You know you shouldn’t be here… Explain yourself.

Wercrata: Forgive me, sir! I-I came to deliver the tributum!

Skull Swordsman: …Oh aye? A likely story! Only a fool would dare to come so late. Or mayhap…a Resistance spy.

Wercrata: No! No, you’ve got it all wrong! I was waylaid by bandits! It’s not my fault!

Skull Swordsman: I said halt!

Skull Swordsman: …Is this a joke? You don’t seriously expect us to believe this is a fifth? How stupid do you think we are?

Wercrata: It is, I swear! On me mother’s life…

Skull Swordsman: Spare us. You came late, you lied about bandits, and then you tried to cheat the Empire of its due.

 [The Skulls start to beat Wercrata. Lyse moves to intervene, but Meffrid stops her.]

 Meffrid: Think you can kill them all─including the ones watching from the tower? Even if you did, others would come for him─and his family. You’d be condemning them all to a life of hard labor─assuming they didn’t just execute them, that is.

Lyse: But it isn’t fair!

 [The Skull soldier is yelling while kicking Wercrata]

 Skull Swordsman: It’s your bloody fault we’re stuck out here patrolling this godsforsaken wasteland! It’s your fault I have to listen to people go on and on about how “Ala Mhigans can’t be trusted”!

Skull Swordsman: I’ve worked and toiled harder than any man! I’m a citizen, godsdammit! And what are you!? A stupid, stubborn little dog who’d sooner bite the hand that feeds him and pine for the good old days!

Fordola: That’s enough! Lord Zenos is expecting our report.

Meffrid: I’ll bet the poor bastard can’t believe his luck. He gets to go home.We should do the same.

[As the soldiers walk off, their commander Fordola, a red-headed Hyuran woman, stops and looks back – but then continues on.]

Meffrid: I’d heard their commander was keen-eyed but gods, that was a near thing…

Meffrid: It tears me up inside to see our own kinsmen doing the bidding of the viceroy. But they made their choice, and if it comes to it, I’ll cut down every last one of them myself.

Meffrid: Wercrata’s alive, and the tributum’s been paid. That’s all that matters for now.

Meffrid: I for one would rather not wait around to see if the Skulls decide to return. We’d best get back to Ala Gannha and tell Raganfrid his man got the job done.

[Back at Ala Gannha]

 Raganfrid: We owe you a debt of gratitude for what you did. Wercrata told me everything─how you fought with the Qiqirn and saved his life.

Lyse: For all the good it did. We saw what happened when he met with the Skulls. How they beat him half to death. We could’ve stopped them.

Raganfrid: Aye, I reckon you could. Meffrid’s a warrior, as is your comrade. And you’re strong, like your father. That much is plain.

Raganfrid: But I thank Rhalgr you did not, because it would not have ended with them. Wercrata and his sister would’ve been branded insurgents, if not the whole lot of us.

Raganfrid: Bones heal, scars fade, but the dead remain dead. We’re alive, and that’s more than can be said for only the gods know how many others.

Lyse: That’s enough for you, is it? To put up with whatever they do to you, so long as you get to see another day?

Raganfrid: That’s right. You grit your teeth and you learn to live with the pain.

Raganfrid: I’ll admit I was quick to judge you, Lyse, and for that I apologize. I know you and yours mean well, I do. But I’m telling you, gods in the heavens as my witness, that we’ve got nothing left to give. We can’t help you.

Lyse: …I understand. Thank you for your honesty.

[ Lyse walks away]

 Raganfrid: She may say it, but she doesn’t mean it. Nor would I expect her to─her father was stubborn as an ox too. If she’s set on walking the same path, I but pray she won’t follow it to the same end…

Meffrid: Well. She took it better than I anticipated. Which isn’t saying much, I suppose.

Meffrid: We should go and see if she’s all right.

 [We locate Lyse.]

 Lyse: …Sorry about running off like that.

Lyse: Ala Mhigans terrorizing their own…? I just can’t accept it, you know? No matter what he thinks, they shouldn’t have to put up with it, day after day after day…

Lyse: I’m not completely naive, you know. I didn’t expect them to “storm a castrum with their pickaxes and shovels,” or whatever it was. But nor did I expect Wercrata to just lie there in the dirt while they kicked him.

Lyse: I can’t claim to know their pain. I barely remember this place or…or even my father’s face.

Lyse: But I remember Yda’s. I remember how scared she was when we ran…and that look in her eyes when she talked about home.

Lyse: Her home…but not mine, is it?

Cynical Youth: There you are, Lyse. I’ve been looking all over for you…

Lyse: Well…you’ve found me. Got something else to say?

Cynical Youth: Aye, that I do… I, um… I said some things to you before that I shouldn’t’ve. ‘Twasn’t my place to do so, and I’m sorry.

Cynical Youth: All that rubbish I spouted about how I loved my village…but when one of ours was in need, I was cowering here with all the others. I didn’t even think to go after Wercrata…but you did.

Cynical Youth: Made me feel like…like the bloody hypocrite I am!

Cynical Youth: If I truly cared for my people, I’d fight for them. So I will…if you’ll have me.

Lyse: …You’re asking to join the Resistance?

Cynical Youth: When you put it like that, I, uh…I suppose I am. But not just me─there are others I know who’ve been thinking about it for a while now. There’s not many of us, and we’re not hardened warriors like you lot, but─

Meffrid: If your heart bleeds for Ala Mhigo, then that’s good enough for me. You and yours are more than welcome at Rhalgr’s Reach.

Cynical Youth: Thank you, sir! You won’t regret this! I’ll go and speak with the others and send word when we’re ready!

Meffrid: …Still think this isn’t your home?

Lyse: N-No, I…I was just…thinking out loud…

Meffrid: And with that, my friends, our mission is concluded. Let us return to the Reach.

 [Back at Rhalgr’s Reach]

 Meffrid: First of all, allow me to commend you both on a job well done.

Meffrid: Though nothing went according to plan, we nevertheless managed to attract some new recruits. And it was your passion and conviction that moved them to join. Thank you.

Lyse: No, thank you─for giving me an opportunity to find out what our people have been through these past twenty years. It’s been…humbling.

Lyse: And troubling, too. I’d heard about the Skulls, but that was the first time I’d seen them in the flesh.

Lyse: I know you say they’re the same as any other imperial soldiers─and maybe that’s how I’ll have to think of them myself if our paths ever cross on the battlefield, but─

Meffrid: When, not if. That day will come, Lyse. You can’t afford to hesitate when it does.

Meffrid: Young, old, conscript, citizen, Garlean, Ala Mhigan─none of that matters. They’ve all got their reasons. But they’re no better than yours, especially when they’re bearing down on you, blade in hand.

Meffrid: …Saying that, I don’t want to kill them any more than you do. If I could convince them to lay down their arms, I would. Sadly, I’ve never been much of a talker myself, but who knows, maybe you could be one, Lyse. Your father certainly was.

Meffrid: Right, then. I’d best begin preparing for these new recruits. Auric, Lyse, it’s been a pleasure.

 [Helping out M’Naago]

 M’naago: Got everything you need? Good. Then let us be off.

 [In the Fringes]

 M’naago: Quiet! …Hear that? That was a ceruleum engine backfiring. Imperials.

Alisaie: Ye gods, you have preternatural senses. I didn’t hear a thing.

M’naago: When you grow up hunting in these lands, you learn to discern the sounds that could mean life and death, be they of a predator or a patrol. From what I’m hearing…we have a seven-man patrol augmented with a single magitek armor. Wide search pattern. Divided into two─no, three teams. I don’t think they know we’re here…

M’naago: It’s risky, but we should split up and try to take them all by surprise at the same time. We don’t want them calling reinforcements.

Alisaie: Three teams, three of us. Nothing for it, then. Where are they?

M’naago: Head north. You should see them long before they see you. I’ll deal with the ones to the south. The armor should be just to the west─Auric’s best equipped to deal with that. We attack in five─that should be enough time to get into position. Rendezvous on the west bank after. Any questions? No? Then good luck!

 [Fight!]

 M’naago: It looks like everything went to plan. Not that I’m surprised─the three soldiers I faced didn’t put up much of a fight.

M’naago: Most of the imperials we get out here are conscripts from other provinces with little training and even less conviction. It’s grim work, killing men and women like that, but don’t doubt that they’d do the same to you if the roles were reversed.

M’naago: And don’t you dare pity a man in armor. Conscript or no, a soldier piloting one of those can kill a dozen good men in the blink of an eye. Not that I need to tell you that, after what happened at the Wall…

M’naago: Right. I believe we’ve rested long enough. We should resume our journey before someone notices their missing patrol.

 M’naago: …We’re clear. Only Alliance patrols ahead.

M’naago: You said the forces at Castrum Oriens were under the command of Flame General Raubahn Aldynn, did you not?

M’naago: By Rhalgr! The Bull of Ala Mhigo himself! I never dreamed I’d have a chance to meet the legend…

 [We approach Raubahn & Pipin]

 Raubahn: It is good to see you again, my friends. I hope you are here to tell me you have made contact with the Resistance?

Alisaie: We are, General.

Alisaie: Allow me to introduce M’naago, of Rhalgr’s Reach.

M’naago: At your service, sir! And may I say what an absolute honor it is to stand before the Bull of Ala Mhigo!

Raubahn: These are not the bloodsands, girl. You and I are but soldiers on a battlefield fighting for the same cause.

M’naago: A-As you say, General!

 M’naago: Ahem. On behalf of Commander Kemp of the Ala Mhigan Resistance, I present to you our formal response.

Raubahn: …Good. I am glad we have reached an accord. Though I was not aware you had suffered such losses.

M’naago: Aye… Some of our finest took part in the Griffin’s doomed assault, and we’ve been struggling to find new recruits ever since.

M’naago: The massacre has cast a pall over the whole Resistance, and many who might once have been open to joining us have since thought better of it.

Alisaie: After all of the Griffin’s false promises, one can hardly blame them. They have no desire to give their lives for a lost cause.

Raubahn: We will not lie to them. This is war, and lives will be lost. Yet what we offer is not the fever dream of a madman, but true hope.

Pipin: The people need proof of this, Father. Let us show it to them.

Pipin: I say we stand shoulder to shoulder with our new allies and engage the Garleans in open warfare. The Resistance must demonstrate that they can hold their own against imperial regulars, and with our assistance, I am confident they can do just that.

 Pipin: If we can achieve even a token victory, I believe it will serve to rekindle the hope of the Ala Mhigan people, and inspire them to rise up once more.

M’naago: Aye, aye… Once word spread that we’d won a battle against the Garleans, I wager we’d have new recruits flocking to us from malms around. The question is, when and where do we strike?

Pipin: I’m glad you asked. I have a plan…

Pipin: Our scouts recently informed me of an interesting development at Castellum Velodyna. Namely, the arrival of a shipment rumored to have come from the research and development facilities near the capital, containing prototype magitek armor.

Pipin: It is our assessment that this armor is to be field-tested here, most likely against Alliance forces. Mayhap before the day is out.

M’naago: Damn it all, more magitek weapons? That’s the last thing we need!

Pipin: Your concern is not unwarranted, but we needn’t despair just yet. The shipment is thought to have contained a single heavy unit and one or possibly two support units. With a well-laid ambush, we are confident we can destroy them all, thus hindering their development and delaying future deployment.

Raubahn: And should we carry this out as a joint endeavor with the Resistance, they will have their rallying cry.

M’naago: It would mean dropping all pretense about the Alliance not wanting to go to war with the Empire…but you’d have a lot more folk willing to stand up and fight if they knew they weren’t alone. And you were going to have to do it eventually anyway.

Pipin: Exactly. And so what I propose is simple:  we harry their patrols to bait them into bringing their prototype weapons to East End, where our Resistance allies will take them from behind.

Raubahn: Simple indeed, and well within our capabilities. I see no reason to delay, especially if a field test is imminent. What say you?

M’naago: Assuming the vice marshal’s intelligence is accurate, I agree with his assessment and fully support his plan. I shall notify my comrades at once.

Pipin: Understood. I shall have one of my men bring you the details of the plan anon.

 [Alisaie speaks to the Warrior of Light]

 Alisaie: And we for our part will be fighting with the Alliance, yes? I somehow doubt you were intending to sit this one out.

Raubahn: We’ve been careful to avoid needless shows of force this side of the Wall. But that’s all about to change─and when it does, you may be sure they’ll send their new toys out to entertain us.

Raubahn: I would ask you to participate in this operation…but from that look I see it is a foregone conclusion. My thanks.

Raubahn: Per Pipin’s plan, we need to turn East End into an imperial graveyard. You’re a dab hand at this, and I’d be a fool not to use you.

Raubahn: Head to this spot on your map─right here, aye. A patrol should be along shortly. Deal with them, then rendezvous with the rest of us at this location. Go well, Auric.

[We deal with the patrol.]

Raubahn: All went to plan, then? Good.

Raubahn: Our scouts report that a unit escorting the prototype weapons has left Castellum Velodyna. The Resistance is already in position, so we have but to wait for our guests to arrive.

 [An Imperial patrol comes down the road, headed by Grynewaht.]

 Grynewaht: Things looked grim for us after Carteneau, didn’t they? Oh, how they doubted us… Yet here we are, right as rain, with fancy new toys to put through their paces…

Grynewaht: Bwahahahaha! It’s like all my namedays have come at once!

 [The Alliance group steps out onto the road.]

 Grynewaht: Well, well, well! If it isn’t Garlond’s little troublemaker! Heh heh heh! I can’t wait to see the look on Zenos’s face when I bring him your head!

Grynewaht: That is, if my secret weapons here don’t grind it into mush! ATTAAACK!

 [FIGHT! If Raubahn will let you, that is.]

 Raubahn:Adders, Flames, deal with the escort! Leave the armor to Auric!

Grynewaht:Bugger me! Is that General Aldynn!? Bwahahaha! A chance to get my revenge on Auric, and test our new weapons, and kill an Alliance commander! Ohhh, it doesn’t get much better than this!

Alisaie: One would almost think he harbored a grudge against you, Auric. Whatever did you do to him?

Grynewaht: Hurry up and KILL THE BASTARDS! We’ve got ’em outnumbered!

Grynewaht: What are you idiots doing? Give them everything we’ve got!

Alisaie: There’s no end to them… I’m here if you need healing, Auric!

Raubahn: Looks like there’s only the one prototype. Whatever else we do this day, I want it destroyed!

Raubahn: Keep it up, lads! That thing won’t take much more!

Grynewaht: Enough! We have secret weapons of great power, don’t we? Let’s bloody well use ’em!

Alisaie: On your guard, Auric! He’s up to something!

Grynewaht: Damn it all! Haven’t we got anything else!? More armor or weapons or something!?

Raubahn: More of them!? I’m going to have to have a word with our scouts…

Grynewaht: This can’t be happening! Not again!

[Grynewaht tries to run and is cut off by the Ala Mighan rebels]

 Grynewaht: He who fights and runs─ What the─? Who in the hells are you lot!?

M’naago: For Ala Mhigo! Let none escape!

Raubahn: We have them now! Forward! Forward!

Grynewaht: You think you’ve won, eh? Heh heh heh… THEN WE GO TOGETHER!

Magitek Vanguard I Prototype: Self-destruct sequence initiated… Sixty… Fifty-nine… Fifty-eight…

Raubahn: Seven hells! There’s no time to get to safety! We must disable it before it blows!

Magitek Vanguard I Prototype: Thirty… Twenty-nine… Twenty-eight…

Magitek Vanguard I Prototype: Fifteen… Fourteen… Thirteen…

 [We kill the prototype before it can self-destruct]

 Grynewaht: No… No, no, NO! My secret weapon!

Grynewaht: Gaaah! Damn it all! Miracles of magitek design, my arse! I’ve passed harder stools than these piles of scrap!

Grynewaht: You’ll pay for this! Mark my words, the next time we meet will be the last!

 [Grynewaht runs off]

 Raubahn: Aye! Run and tell your viceroy! The day belongs to Ala Mhigo!

Raubahn: Well done, all of you. I’d call this operation a resounding success.

Conrad: Can’t say I’m surprised. The “Bull of Ala Mhigo” had an impressive military record before he went west, as I recall.

Raubahn: Credit where it’s due, Master Kemp. ‘Twas Marshal Tarupin who made this plan, and all of you, Resistance and Alliance alike, who carried it out to perfection.

Conrad: Aye, that they did. Not a single casualty, for which I’m grateful beyond words. I’ve no doubt our comrades back at the Reach will feel the same.

Raubahn: As will ours.

Conrad: It’s been a pleasure, General. Until the next battle. M’naago─I leave the Scions in your care.

Raubahn: We shall return to the castrum, then. Auric, Mistress Leveilleur─once more you have my thanks. As Master Kemp said, until the next battle.

M’naago: Well, there’s no reason to remain here any longer. Let’s get back to the Reach.

[Back at the Reach.]

 M’naago: You didn’t have to take part in the operation, but you did. You went above and beyond what was asked of you, without hesitation, and for that we owe you a debt.

 M’naago: Our victory may not count for much in practical terms, but its symbolic value can’t be overstated.

M’naago: Alliance and Resistance fighters came together to face an imperial unit equipped with Garlemald’s newest weapons─and smashed them. The people will remember this day.

Conrad: Aye, that they will, for it marks the beginning of something far greater than any single victory:  the beginning of a campaign by a united Eorzea to drive the Garleans from our lands.

Conrad:Promises and platitudes mean naught without action. But the Alliance took the field and risked their lives for our cause.

Conrad: Hah, to think that the last time Gridanian troops trod this soil was more than a century ago, during the Autumn War─and that was to defend against our invasion.

Conrad:Ours is a long and bloody history, to be sure, and it gives me heart to see that despite our acrimonious past, we can still come together for the sake of the future.

M’naago: Well said, Commander! Which is why I intend to go from village to village and spread word of our victory and our new alliance.

M’naago: Auric, Alisaie, I cannot thank you enough for your assistance.

M’naago: The people will flock to our banners, my friends. Just you wait and see!

Conrad: Owing to the efforts of you all, we have accomplished a great deal in a short time. The Resistance thanks you for your service, Scions.

Alphinaud: I see operations here have been proceeding apace in my absence.

Alisaie: Welcome back, Brother dearest. I take it your efforts to gather new recruits were successful.

Alphinaud: Indeed. There were several amongst the Scions’ ranks that were quite eager to take part in our joint endeavor with the Resistance, whom I am come to present.

Arenvald:Commander Kemp, if I may! My name…my name is Arenvald Lentius. A…a half-breed, as you can doubtless tell.

Arenvald:I’m here to fight for a free Ala Mhigo. For an Ala Mhigo where women like my mother are never made to suffer. I pray you grant me this honor.

Conrad: …You are a trueborn son of Gyr Abania, same as me. This is not my honor to grant, but yours to freely take. Welcome, brother.

Conrad: With our swelling ranks, and the aid of the Eorzean Alliance and the Scions of the Seventh Dawn, I believe we will soon be in a position to seize the initiative.

Conrad: Once our new recruits have received sufficient training, I will propose to General Aldynn that we draw up plans for an assault on Castellum Velodyna.

M’naago: Then, in the meantime, we will make what preparations we can!

[Meanwhile at Zenos Yae Galvus’ HQ]

[The Garlean Anthem plays:

“Beyond majestic mountains, across the emerald dale,

On march the ivory standard, united we prevail.

From distant shores of Othard to the lakes of Aldenard,

The light of mighty Garlemald, fore’er our guiding star.”]

Imperial Tribunus Militum: Alliance forces have occupied Castrum Oriens and taken up positions along the length of the Wall. Our patrols have engaged their reconnaissance parties on sight, but there have been no significant exchanges…

Imperial Tribunus Militum: …Save one. A unit tasked with field-testing prototype magitek weapons was attacked. The weapons were destroyed, with the unit sustaining near-total casualties.

Zenos Yae Galvus: …Near-total? Go on.

Imperial Pilus Prior: My lord, there was but a single survivor from the unit in question, which falls under my command.

Imperial Pilus Prior: According to his report, they were ambushed by a contingent of Eorzean Alliance regulars, abetted by Resistance insurgents.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Hm. A simple ambush, and only one survivor. A fine day’s work.

Zenos Yae Galvus: The stubbornness to survive is not without worth… He may live. However, the XIIth is no place for the weak.

Imperial Pilus Prior:He shall be relegated at once, my lord. As you say, the XIIth is no place for cowards who count their lives more precious than the cause.

Zenos Yae Galvus:Indeed, indeed. We have no need of cowards…

Imperial Pilus Prior: M-My lord, I…

Zenos Yae Galvus:Cowards who defer critical missions to their subordinates─who hide within their castra, never meeting their prey in battle, never staring into the whites of their eyes.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Why, when confronted with a heretofore unknown eikon, did we surrender the Wall to the Alliance?

Zenos Yae Galvus: Because my honored father, in his infinite wisdom, has not seen fit to grant us leave to march on their lands.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Accordingly, we have extended an invitation to our neighbors. Gyr Abania is where we shall host them─the field upon which we shall enjoy the sport of kings.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Patience is paramount. Cornered animals may have spirit, but they are ultimately predictable, and very poor sport. But if one dangles the promise of freedom before them, while nipping at their heels to stoke their passion, then things become interesting.It is a delicate dance…and one which asks much of my hounds.

Zenos Yae Galvus: And so I put the question to you, my fellow huntsmen:  how shall we deal with these savages?

Fordola: My lord, I have a proposal!

Imperial Tribunus Militum: Silence, Ala Mhigan! You do forget yourself!

Imperial Tribunus Militum: Only by the grace of Lord van Baelsar were you afforded a place here─and that in name alone! We have no need of your “proposals,” savage.

Fordola: Grrr…

Zenos Yae Galvus: This “savage” yearns to hunt her own… The floor is yours, Commander.

Fordola: Thank you, my lord.

 [Fade out]

 [Back at the Reach.]

 Conrad: I feared it would take longer to rouse the people to action after the disaster at the Wall, but it seems our countrymen are not so easily discouraged. Change is on the horizon, my friends.

M’naago: Right, then. I’ve got duties to attend to.

Alphinaud: Mayhap we could assist you with said duties? We are here to help, after all.

Alphinaud: The three of you have been busy, so I will understand if you require time to rest. If not, however, it would seem sensible to assist our allies with their preparations.

M’naago: We’d be grateful for any and all help you can offer. If you ask around, I guarantee you won’t want for work.

[Need any help over here?]

 Beves: I-I-I beg your pardon? The man who bested Gaius van Baelsar wishes to offer me his assistance!?

Beves: I say, this is highly irregular…though I have heard it said you had a penchant for aiding the common man. In which case…

Beves: Before the occupation I was a humble historian. While my duties leave me scarce time for aught else, I think it important that these momentous events be recorded for the benefit of future generations.

Beves: Primary sources are indispensable, and I had a mind to question a number of my fellow freedom fighters─ask them their motivations for taking up this cause and so forth.

Beves: You may take down their statements in this log. And…Auric…thank you for your service. Now and ever after.

Hrotmar: Why’d I join the Resistance? Well, if you must know…it was to avenge a friend the imperials butchered before my very eyes, back in Ala Mhigo.

Hrotmar: We owned a stall in the markets, and a passing soldier snatched up a piece of fruit. He spoke out before I could stop him, only to get a fulm of steel in the gut for his troubles. I found my way here, and that was that.

 

Ahelissa: I was just a cook before all this. Simple fare, really. Had a chance to lend a hand and help feed some refugees one day…

Ahelissa: I took a liking to the fighters. They…believed, you know? And there’s always a need for cooks─or at least people who can work with whatever the foraging parties turn up…

 

 Hughoc: Hm? Aren’t you the eikon-slayer? Damned if I know why you’d bother asking someone like me why I joined the Resistance, but it’s simple:  if I wasn’t fighting for Ala Mhigo, I’d be fighting for the Empire.

Hughoc: You’re either with ’em or not, and if you’re with ’em, you may as well make the most of it. Food, training, citizenship if you live long enough. You’ll die stealing someone else’s land, like as not, but that’s the choice. But me? I’d rather die here.

 

Orella: Why? Why indeed… To save lives, perhaps. Or to make amends for the ones I couldn’t.

Orella: My father and my brothers were worked to death while building a castrum. What did it matter to the Garleans, eh? More where that lot came from. After that, I couldn’t keep on doing nothing.

 

Beves: Well met, Auric. Have you spoken with the freedom fighters as I asked?

Beves: Hmm… As fascinating as they are varied… You have a knack for convincing others to bear their hearts to you. I could not have done better myself.

Beves: Many years from now, when these tempestuous times pass into memory, their accounts will serve as a window into the struggle. We must never forget, my friend. Never.

[Need any help?]

Ahelissa: You want to help, do you? Hmm… Seeing as how I’m in no position to leave the stewpot unattended, could you go and ask Tebbe for a variety of herbs? Six sprigs or so of whatever he’s got on hand should suffice.

Ahelissa: It’s not as haphazard as it may seem. Depending on the recipe, it doesn’t really matter what sort you add, so long as you add something. I’ll be here when you get back.

Tebbe: Herbs, is it? Six sprigs of whatever’s on hand? ‘Fraid I can’t spare that much. You’ll take two, and be glad of it.

Tebbe: The remainder you’ll have to gather yourself. Shouldn’t be too much of a bother, though─you’d be surprised what you can find growing underfoot, even in the Reach.

Ahelissa: Ah, there you are. Got those herbs I asked for?

Ahelissa: Thanks, that’ll do nicely. And, uh…sorry to impose upon you, sir. Thought you were another new recruit. Didn’t realize until after that you were, uh…

Ahelissa: But to answer the question that’s probably on your mind, yes. It’s always like this. Never enough food or supplies to go around.

Ahelissa: All the more reason to be grateful when our countrymen can spare some for the cause. Though that comes at a cost, too. Too many villages, too many children more deserving than us…

Ahelissa: But a man can’t fight on an empty stomach, can he? So we partake, as we must. And we never lose sight of the dream.

[Got any fetch quests for me?]

 Ananta Battlemaid: You look like a ssstrider in sssearch of comrades in need. If ssso, I have a tasssk for you.

Ananta Battlemaid: I am a trainer, and I was told to expect new recruitsss thisss day, yet nary a one has come. Perhapsss they were given the wrong time or location. I do not know.

Ananta Battlemaid: They number five in all, these would-be warriors. Sssend them unto me, should you chance to find them.

Faint-hearted Recruit: Oh bugger, you were sent by the snake, weren’t you!? I heard one in four recruits doesn’t live through their training. That can’t be true, right? Oh bugger, oh bugger…

Devout Recruit: I know, I know. I’m late. But I had to say a prayer for my sister first. After what the imperials did to her, death was a mercy…

Ananta Battlemaid: Not all appreciate the rigor with which I train my recruitsss. Sssome favor a gentler approach. As if the imperials will be ssso kind.

Ananta Battlemaid: ‘Tis a thanklesss job, to teach, sssome sssay. But I sssay their sssurvival is thanksss enough. Fare you well.

 [You look like you need a hand. Got any sheep that need delousing? Or a chocobo with ticks?]

 Swarthy Resistance Fighter: Damn it all! Where could it have got to!?

Swarthy Resistance Fighter: Oh! Um, pardon me, fellow lover of freedom and justice. You haven’t seen a ward of the Destroyer anywhere, have you? Maybe on the ground, as if a certain bloody fool had dropped it?

Swarthy Resistance Fighter: Aye, I’d been him. I had it this morning, that much I know for certain, and I’ve not left the Reach since, so it’s got to be around here somewhere.

Swarthy Resistance Fighter: Hmm… If you’ve got a moment to spare, would you be willing to help me search? I spent some time near the Temple of the Fist earlier, so it might be there. As for me, I’ll look around near the officer’s pavilion.

Swarthy Resistance Fighter: They’re hardly rare, I know, and I could just as easily buy another, but even so… Please, help me find it…

Swarthy Resistance Fighter: I swear, I’ve searched high and low, but it just won’t turn up…

Swarthy Resistance Fighter: Seven hells, that’s the one! That’s my lucky ward! You’re a godssend, brother!

Swarthy Resistance Fighter: Before I was born, my mother made a pilgrimage to the Temple of the Fist, where she, like many others, received the blessings of the monks.

Swarthy Resistance Fighter: And then Theodoric came and burned it all to the ground, the mad bastard. And after him came the Garleans, who cared even less for our beliefs.

Swarthy Resistance Fighter: But I still keep to the old ways, as do many others. And when my son is born, I’ll teach him the stories and the scripture, as my mother taught me…

[I’ve run out of chores. Can I have the plot back please?]

Alphinaud: And with that, another task is complete…Ah, Auric. I hear you have been keeping busy.

M’naago: Aye, that he has, and we thank him for it.

Conrad: It pleases me to inform you that our new recruits have completed their initial training and stand ready to contribute.

Conrad: As discussed, M’naago, I would have you present my proposal for an assault on Castellum Velodyna to General Aldynn personally.

M’naago: Of course, sir!

M’naago: Are you and yours planning to return to Castrum Oriens before the operation? If so, why don’t we travel together?

Alphinaud: That seems a fine suggestion, but I must consult my comrades ere we depart.

M’naago: Very well. I will wait for you at the pass. But not too long!

Alphinaud: I expect Krile and Y’shtola will wish to remain here to support the chirurgeons, but nevertheless, we should go and ask them.

[At the infirmary.]

Y’shtola: Hm? Is aught amiss?

Y’shtola: …I see. That would explain the sudden flurry of activity outside.

Alphinaud: This joint operation marks a turning point in our conflict with the Garleans. For the first time, the Resistance and the Alliance shall go on the offensive and attempt to capture an imperial outpost in occupied territory.

Alphinaud: Personally, I believe it is imperative that we offer them our full support. As was the case with Ishgard, however, this is not a choice to be made lightly, nor less on others’ behalves. This is war, and every Scion must decide what part he or she would play.

Lyse: I’ll fight. For Ala Mhigo, for my father, for Yda. I’m in it to the end.

Alisaie: The choice was made for us ere we were born, Brother, when the Empire marched on Eorzea.

Alisaie: They will stop at nothing to subjugate or slaughter us all. Van Baelsar and van Darnus were but the first to try.

Alphinaud: …Though your fervor is surprising, I cannot dispute your logic.

Alphinaud: At the risk of repeating myself, I am of course of the same mind. The present situation is untenable, and further complicated by the existence of Ilberd’s primal. I believe we have no recourse but to directly and openly intervene.

Y’shtola: …I thought this a foregone conclusion given our actions thus far, but if you require renewed affirmation, then yes, I am still wholly committed to this cause. For it is ultimately the selfsame cause I have served since first I pledged to serve Master Louisoix and the Circle of Knowing:  the Salvation of Eorzea, by any means necessary.

Y’shtola: That said, I shall refrain from taking the field on this occasion. There are many here who require further treatment, and doubtless more to come after.

Krile: I came here for Minfilia, and that hasn’t changed. However, I’d like to stay with Y’shtola for now and tend to the wounded.

Alphinaud: As for you, Auric…you are, to quote our dear friend Lord Edmont, the man who slew Gaius van Baelsar and some half-dozen primals besides. Your presence may well prove the difference between victory and defeat.

Alphinaud: Many look to you as a hero, and heap great expectations upon your shoulders. But you, like every Scion, must decide for yourself.

[“For those we can yet save”]

 Alphinaud: Well said. Well said indeed…

Alisaie: Take care, Y’shtola, Krile, and do not hesitate to contact us should you require assistance. Lyse─I would ask that you remain here, by Conrad’s side.

Alisaie: We should go, or M’naago will leave without us.

Alphinaud: Might I persuade you to join us, Auric? Should you wish to give your decision further consideration, Castrum Oriens would seem an apt place to do it. You need not answer right away. I am sure I can convince M’naago to wait a little longer.

Alphinaud: So you will be accompanying us? Full glad am I to hear it.

M’naago: All set? Excellent. Then let us be off!

Raubahn: Welcome back, comrades. What news?

M’naago: Greetings, General. I am come at Commander Kemp’s behest to brief you on the latest developments at the Reach.

M’naago: Our recruitment efforts have exceeded expectations. In addition to welcoming many motivated young Ala Mhigans, our ranks have been bolstered by the arrival of a number of experienced veterans, thanks in large part to the efforts of the Scions.

M’naago: As a consequence, we are now able to field half a dozen new units, with more being trained as we speak.

Raubahn: Good. I gather Conrad is eager to strike while the iron’s hot?

M’naago: Just so, General. He proposes that we begin preparations for a joint operation to capture Castellum Velodyna.

Pipin: Capture Velodyna? That will not be easy. It will, however, be necessary if we are ever to push east towards the capital…

Raubahn: There is no profit in delay. It is only a matter of time before the Garleans learn of our plans and summon reinforcements.

Raubahn: The Alliance hereby accepts Commander Kemp’s proposal. Tell him to take no chances─bring every able-bodied Ala Mhigan who can wield a weapon.

Raubahn: Pipin─I want Velodyna watched. Assess its defenses. Every fortress has a weakness, and I would know this one’s.

Alisaie: If there is no objection, General, might the Scions join Marshal Tarupin?

Raubahn: By all means. If that is all─let us be about it!

Alisaie: Conrad and the General are of one mind, it seems… I only wish I could say the same. While this aggressive strategy may well profit us in the end, what losses will we suffer in the meantime…?

Alisaie: Anyway, we should speak with the vice marshal about this reconnaissance mission and see how he would like to proceed.

Pipin: Thank you for volunteering to join me. This should be a fairly straightforward reconnaissance mission, so long as we do not have the ill fortune to run afoul of an imperial patrol.

Pipin: Come─our destination is beyond East End, just north of Velodyna.

[At Castellum Velodyna]

Pipin: This ought to be close enough. Now we settle in for a long watch.

Pipin: That said…it would be prudent to keep your weapons at the ready, in the event a passing patrol stumbles upon us, or worse…

Pipin: Excellent… The disposition of the imperial forces is exactly as expected. I will notify Father.

Pipin: Cannon fire! Where did it come from?

Alisaie: Smoke! There! Is that─ Oh gods, it’s Rhalgr’s Reach!

Alphinaud: It’s no use─I think someone’s jamming our communications.

Alisaie: You don’t think… Could this be part of a coordinated attack?

Pipin: Too early to draw conclusions.We must abort the assault and return to the Reach at once.

 [The Reach is under attack by forces under Fordola’s command]

 Fordola: Forward! FORWARD! Give them no quarter!

Meffrid: You!

Meffrid: Traitor! Kinslayer!

Fordola: You’re no kin of mine!

[Fordola strikes down Meffrid as Lyse watches]

 Lyse: Meffrid!

Lyse: Hells take you!

 [Lyse engages Fordola. Fordola is knocked off balance.]

 Fordola: Hurgh…

 [Zenos Yae Galvus walks onto the scene, in full Imperial armor]

 Zenos Yae Galvus: Well, well…

Zenos Yae Galvus: Stand aside, Pilus. This one has promise.

Fordola: Have a care, my lord. She’s not like the others.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Hm. Do not disappoint me, girl. Or I will kill you.

 [Zenos pulls a sword from a rotating scabbard]

 [Conrad hits Fordola with a fireball, knocking her down.]

 Conrad: Seven hells… It’s him! It’s Zenos!

Lyse: The viceroy? Oh…you are a dead man!

 [Lyse charges Zenos. Zenos blocks her every strike easily.]

 Zenos Yae Galvus: So spirited…and yet so empty.

 [Zenos knocks Lyse down and stands over her in a threatening posture.]

 [Y’shtola charges between them and throws up a magic barrier that stops Zenos’ blade.]

 Y’shtola: Lyse, run!

 Zenos Yae Galvus: Ah, a magical barrier. Alas… It will not save you.

 [Zenos forces his blade into Y’shtola’s barrier, which cracks and then shatters. Y’shtola falls to the ground, bleeding heavily.]

Lyse: Y’shtola!

Conrad: Hold the line, by Rhalgr! Hold the line!

 [Fordola gets to her feet and fells Conrad. The screen goes black.]

 [Aphinaud, Alisaie, Pipin and the Warrior of Light encounter Krile and a group of Ala Mihgan rebels,

including M’naago and Arenvald, on the outskirts of Rhalgr’s Reach.]

 Alphinaud: Krile!

Krile: Alphinaud!

Alphinaud: We saw the smoke and thought we heard explosions. Are we under attack?

 Krile: The imperials were all over us before we realized what was happening.No one knew where to run or what to do─it was chaos.

Krile: Lyse and Master Kemp rallied the guards and bought us enough time to get some of the wounded to safety, but I haven’t seen either of them since…

Pipin: Confound it! If we lose the Reach, this will all have been for naught!

Alphinaud: Arenvald─can you escort these people to the Wall?

Arenvald: Aye, sir.

Alphinaud: Our place is at the Reach. We must offer such aid and succor as we are able. Saving lives is now our paramount concern.

Pipin: If we can hold back the imperials until Father sends reinforcements, we may yet turn the tide…

Krile: I’ll join you. I’ve done all I can for these people, and you’ll be crying out for a healer in there.

Alphinaud: I fear you’re right. Come, there is no time to lose!

 [Our group charges toward the Reach. FIGHT!]

 Straggler: Gods help us, they’re killing everyone!

Alisaie: We have to stop them while there’s still someone left to save!

Straggler: The imperials came from nowhere…started cutting people down left and right…

Alphinaud: Reinforcements are on the way. Spread the word.We should keep moving…

 [More FIGHT!]

Alphinaud: Confound it! Nothing for it but to fight.

Krile: Twelve forfend… It’s a bloodbath…Remember that we’re here to save lives! Defend the hostages!

Alisaie: Those monsters─these people had surrendered!

Pipin of the Steel Heart: It’s not too late for the others. We must hurry!

 [A group of Ferae — Wolfmen — are attacking]

 Alphinaud: What the─ Are those beastmen fighting for the imperials? I’ve never seen them before…

Resistance Fighter: They…they took Lyse and the others deeper inside… You’ve…you’ve got…

Krile: There they are! We’re not too late!

Fordola rem Lupis: Well, well. A rescue party, is it? We’ll see about that.

 [Face to face with Fordola. She’s forced back.]

 Fordola rem Lupis: Gah! Who in the seven hells are you!?

 [We find Lyse, conscious but winded, and a bloodied and unmoving Y’shtola. Krile bends over the falled Miqo’te.]

 Krile: Alphinaud, I need your help!

 [They begin to work on healing Y’shtola]

 Fordola: My lord, the prisoners!

Zenos Yae Galvus: See to your men, Pilus.

Fordola: Uh─ As you command, my lord.

 [Fordola leaves]

 Zenos Yae Galvus: Your friends were a disappointment. But you… You will entertain me, will you not?

 [What do you want, a song and dance number? Oh, you want a fight. Sure, why not.]

 Alisaie: If we kill him, here and now, we can end this!

Zenos Yae Galvus: I have no need for this rabble.

 [Zenos flattens everyone but the Warrior of Light]

 Pipin of the Steel Heart: Seven hells… Not even Father could do that…

Zenos Yae Galvus: Hm. You yet stand. Mayhap you have potential.

 [FIGHT!]

  Zenos Yae Galvus: Better…but lacking nevertheless…

 [FIGHT!]

  Zenos Yae Galvus: It would seem I misjudged you. This ends now.

 [Zenos one-shots the Warrior of Light. Jerk. But at least his sword breaks.]

 Zenos Yae Galvus: Pathetic.

 [Zenos drops the broken sword and walks away.]

 [Raubahn sees Zenos walking away.]

 Raubahn: Seven hells…

 [Raubahn moves to draw his weapon but then hesitates.]

 Flame Officer: Shall we give chase, General?

Raubahn: Nay. There has been enough death this day. See to the wounded.

 [Raubahn approaches the defeated Warrior of Light]

 Raubahn: You all right, lad?

 [“I think my pride might have taken a knock.”]

 Raubahn: ‘Tis no ordinary foe could best the likes of you.

 [Healers are working on Y’shtola and Conrad.]

 Lyse: Don’t you die on me, Y’shtola! Hold on!

Krile: Don’t worry! It’s going to be all right!

Krile: Alphinaud! Master Kemp is all yours!

Alphinaud: Understood!

 [Krile turns to the Warrior of Light]

 Krile: Don’t just stand there gawping! Hold her down while I work!

 [Krile keeps healing]

 Krile: The worst is passed, but without the proper facilities I can do no more.

Alphinaud: Master Kemp too would be better served in the infirmary.Let us take them there without delay.

Krile: Give us a hand, would you, Lyse?

 [Krile turns to the Warrior of Light again]

 Krile: I know you must be exhausted, but there will be others who need our help. Leave these two to us and look to the other wounded.

Raubahn: Now then─let’s do what we can for the wounded. Every minute counts!

Raubahn: See to the wounded, Auric. If they live, help them. If not, move on.

[Meffrid lies motionless, having breathed his last. Clenched in his fist is a small charm, which you take for safekeeping.]

 Thewy Youth: He was already cold when I got to him… There was naught I could do.That charm must’ve been important. You’d best take it to Conrad.

Conrad: M’naago? Meffrid? Where are you…?

 [I hand over Meffrid’s charm.]

 Conrad: This…this is…

Conrad: …He’s dead, isn’t he.

Conrad: Meffrid was a worrier. Always thinking about others before himself. He once had an imperial patrol chase him nigh on twenty malms so that his wounded would have time to escape…

Conrad: His comrades loved him for it, of course…though that only made him worry more. Did you know that he sent his men in Quarrymill away because he thought they were fighting for him, and not the cause? Aye, well, he did. The only life he was willing to risk was his own, you see.

Conrad: But that’s exactly the kind of man who should be leader! The kind of man who deserves to survive. Not a…not an old fool who’s all used up.

Alphinaud: …There’s no logic to it, Master Kemp. There never is.

Alphinaud: Who stands, who falls… In the heat of battle, we can but do our best─as he did. Meffrid will be sorely missed, aye…but because of his sacrifice, many now live who otherwise would not─and they need us, now more than ever.

Conrad: Aye…aye, that they do. Forgive me. I had…high hopes for him, is all…

Pipin: Our defeat was no near thing. It was total─a humiliation. We were powerless to withstand our enemy’s assault.

Pipin: But we cannot afford to dwell on our failure. As Alphinaud said, it is those who survived whom we must think of now.

Pipin: Rhalgr’s Reach is no longer safe. The imperials may have withdrawn, but they could return at any time to finish what they began. We dare not remain here.

Pipin: Those who are not fit to make the journey to Castrum Oriens will need to be taken by chocobo carriage. Agreed?

Pipin: Good. I shall oversee preparations for the carriages. In the meantime, I would have you scour the infirmary for any supplies that might prove useful during the journey.

[Infirmary]

 Orella: Forgive me, but it is imperative that I continue preparing medicines for the wounded. If you desire treatment, I must ask that you seek it elsewhere.

Orella: Oh, I see… In that case, you are free to search the Barber and take that which you require. I would not have our people dying en route.

Orella: I would assist you, but this process demands my undivided attention.

Flame Courier: Lieutenant Seagard. Marshal Tarupin said you might have something for me?

Flame Courier: Twelve be praised. This should put the drivers’ hearts at ease. Tell the vice marshal we await his orders.

Krile: Y’shtola and the others are safely strapped in. Don’t worry─I’ll be by her side the entire time.

Alphinaud: Thank you, Krile.

Lyse: I’ll walk alongside. They’ll need protection in case the Garleans try anything.

Lyse: Hang on. You’re injured too, aren’t you? Shouldn’t you be in one of the carriages?

Conrad: I’m not so frail that I can’t make the trip on my own. Besides, there’s still work to be done here. I’ll see you at the Wall when it’s finished.

Pipin: As you wish. Then let us set forth at once. We shall move as quickly as our comrades’ health allows.

Pipin: To Castrum Oriens!

[In Castrum Oriens]

 Conrad: You saved a good many of my men, and I cannot thank you enough for that.

Conrad: …But the fact remains:  our forces were decimated. In this state, we’ll not be mounting an assault on Castellum Velodyna or anywhere else.

Conrad: We need to be honest with ourselves about our prospects. But first, we need to put our affairs here in order. Afterwards, I’ll join you all at Castrum Oriens.

Alphinaud: Understood. We will go and speak with General Aldynn.

 

[We find Raubahn.]

 

Raubahn: Pipin has already departed with the wounded, has he? Good. We have completed our search of the Reach and the surrounding area.

Raubahn: As far as we can tell, Zenos and his men returned straightways to Specula Imperatoris after quitting this place. ‘Twould seem he’s lost interest in us.

Alphinaud: Which brings us to the most troubling question of all─not how he found us, but why he chose to spare our lives having done so.

Raubahn: In war, you kill or capture your enemy. You don’t leave him to fight another day. Only a fool would turn his back and walk away…but Zenos is no fool.

Raubahn: Whatever his motive, this is neither the time nor the place to think on it. I will leave a token force to watch over the Reach. The rest will fall back to Castrum Oriens. We can discuss our path forward there.

Lyse: Krile is with Y’shtola. She still hasn’t woken up, but…Krile says she’s through the worst.

Alphinaud: Given the severity of her wound, we could have hoped for no more. Let us pray she makes a full recovery.

Lyse: We lost a lot of good people, didn’t we…

Lyse: I saw it happen. When that Skulls commander cut down Meffrid. A single blow, and that was it.

Lyse: Everything he fought for, all his hopes and dreams for the future. Gone in an instant. And do you want to know the worst part? It wasn’t a Garlean who did it─it was an Ala Mhigan.

Lyse: Gods help me, if I ever─ No. Not now. Not while the General’s waiting.

Alisaie: Oh, Lyse…

Conrad: Were it not for the swift actions of the Scions and the Alliance, many more would have died. You risked your lives to save ours, and for that we thank you.

Alphinaud: There is no need for thanks. We are allies, are we not?

Raubahn: Aye, just so. Let us not dwell on this tragedy, but look to the future.

Conrad: The future…? I’m sorry, General, but there is no future for us.

Conrad: We’ve lost too many… Gods, I can still see Meffrid with that woman standing over him… <sigh> They’ve ripped the heart out of us, General. They’ve broken us. Our fight is over.

Alphinaud: Master Kemp, please…

Conrad: I’ll always hate them with every fiber of my being. For what they took from us, then and now. Our homeland…our freedom…our bloody children…

Lyse: You mean the Skulls… The youths who fight for Zenos.

Conrad:Crania Lupi. The Black Wolf’s legacy, and our shame. A unit made up of children born to Ala Mhigan dignitaries who came of age during the occupation.

 

[Ed. Note: “Crania Lupi” can be very roughly translated from Greek as “Skull Wolves”.]

 

Conrad:Sons and daughters of Gyr Abania raised to be proud citizens of the Empire, with all the rights and responsibilities that entails.

Conrad: It’d be easy to curse them and call them traitors, but they’re our children. Our flesh and blood! If the only way to forge the future we want is to cut down our own, then…

M’naago: Then what was it all for!?

Lyse: Naago…

M’naago: What will you say to the families of the fallen─to the mothers and the widows and the orphans? Will you tell them it was all for nothing!?

Raubahn: Listen to the girl. We dare not suffer our comrades’ sacrifices to have been in vain. Now is the time to steel our resolve and press on, painful though it may be.

Conrad: And when Zenos comes back with his army? What then? This isn’t the first time, you know. You’ll be hard-pressed to find men brave or stupid enough to face him again.

Lyse: I still can’t believe how strong he was. He humiliated us back there, the Warrior of Light included. Gods help us if he’s next in line to the Garlean throne.

Alphinaud: Loath though I am to say it, we should not be surprised. Before succeeding van Baelsar in Ala Mhigo, Zenos led the imperial army to Doma, where he crushed the rebellion utterly.

Alphinaud: As a matter of fact, Doma remains in his charge to this day. Suffice it to say, Varis’s heir is a peerless warrior and an accomplished general. The question is, how are we to contend with such a foe?

 

[“We take the fight to Doma”]

 

Alphinaud: Interesting… You are suggesting we kindle the flames of revolution in Doma once more, and force Zenos to fight a war on two fronts?

Conrad: For that, there would need to be someone left to fight on this front by the time you got back. Look, I’ll not deny the plan has promise─and I feel for our brothers and sisters in Doma, truly I do─but I fear we lack the strength tosee it through.

Raubahn: Have faith in your people, Master Kemp. Them and the Scions. Hold fast, rebuild, and when all is in place, we shall defeat Zenos together.

Lyse: If you’re going to Doma, I’m coming too. I want to help our friends there…and make sure nothing like this ever happens again.

 Raubahn: Give us the time we need, and we will give you something far greater.

Conrad: Very well. For all you have done for us, we will fight on. But be swift, comrades. Ala Mhigo has suffered enough.

Alphinaud: It goes without saying, but the Scions alone have not the strength to topple a provincial government, here or anywhere else.

Alphinaud: And I am quite certain the same can be said of the Doman Liberation Front. Nevertheless, we can but go and assess the situation for ourselves, and see what can be done.

Alphinaud: Lest you doubt what good we few can accomplish, I would remind you that my grandfather and his twelve disciples once journeyed to these lands to save Eorzea and her people from certain doom. Brave souls with an impossible task. And Eorzea lives on.

Alphinaud: Our present mission may not be as monumental in scope, but it is no less important to the multitudes whom we would free from imperial oppression─whom we will free.

Alisaie: “Where men go as one, there is life. And where there is life, there is cause to hope.“ Our grandfather believed that, and so do I…

Alisaie: But before we can forge ties with our friends in the Far East, we must first find a way to reach them. Othard is not exactly over the river and through the woods.

Alphinaud: I am one step ahead of you, dear sister─or rather, Tataru is. But before we discuss that, there is another issue I wish to address.

Alphinaud: Much as I would like it if we could all make this journey together, someone will need to remain to serve as liaison to the Alliance and the Resistance during this critical period. Moreover, as Y’shtola cannot be left unattended…

 

[Alphinaud looks like he’s ready to ask Alisaie to stay. Krile interrupts.]

 

Krile: …Then I should obviously remain? Very well. Issue addressed.

Krile: You know, Alphinaud, it would have been quicker just to ask─and markedly less patronizing.

Alphinaud: Y-Yes, I suppose, uh… Ahem. Would you be willing to look after Y’shtola and provide support to Arenvald and the others?

Krile: Yes, Alphinaud. I would. You see? That wasn’t so hard, was it? Enjoy your trip, and don’t you dare return with a gift!

Alphinaud: Oh, I would not dream of it… Right, then. Sister, Auric, Lyse─gather your things. We are for Limsa Lominsa.

 

[In Limsa]

 

Lyse: Vylbrand was always Y’shtola’s domain. I haven’t spent much time here, to be honest…

Alisaie: I spoke with Urianger and Thancred along the way. To say they were surprised by our stratagem would be something of an understatement, but they did not dispute its logic.

Alphinaud: Tataru should be here any moment with our ship’s captain.

Lyse: So we’re going by sea after all. Is Merlwyb lending us our pick of the Crimson Fleet?

Alphinaud: Not…exactly. You are right, in as much as we will be traveling by sea. Regrettably, it is simply not feasible for an airship to travel such a distance without impossibly large fuel reserves, to say nothing of the inevitability of running afoul of the Empire’s aerial defenses.

Alphinaud: …But then it is equally infeasible to sail an Eorzean Alliance vessel halfway around the world without the Empire taking notice.

Alphinaud: Which leaves us with only one other option… Ah, speak of the devil.

Tataru: Sorry to keep you waiting! May I present to you Captain Carvallain of the Kraken’s Arms!

Alisaie: The Kraken’s Arms!? Don’t tell me you made a deal with pirates!

Carvallain: Greetings and salutations, Scions. I take it from your comrade’s tone that you no longer wish to proceed with our proposed arrangement?

Alphinaud: Not at all, Captain. Pray forgive my sister her outburst─she has ever been one to speak her mind. I, on the other hand, am the very soul of discretion, as many well-respected personages would attest, from the offices of the Admiral, to the High Houses of Ishgard.

Alphinaud: Ah, but where was I? Oh, yes! The Scions of the Seventh Dawn do indeed still wish to employ your services. However, it is important that you are aware of certain extenuating circumstances…

Carvallain: …And intent on securing passage to the Far East, you came to us, knowing us to be the proud purveyors of said region’s finest spices.

Alisaie: …Which you steal from gods-fearing merchants out on the high seas.

Carvallain: Whatever privateering the Kraken’s Arms may or may not engage in is strictly within the limits of the law, as set forth by our indefatigable keeper of the peace. More to the point, we are pragmatists. I see considerable risk in aiding your cause, and negligible profit.

Tataru: Well, I for one think the captain has a point. The five seas can be extremely treacherous, and many a poor, unfortunate soul has to come to grief out there on the waves.

Tataru: Why, when we were in Ishgard, I heard the tragical tale of how the heir to House Durendaire vanished at sea!

Tataru: Even now, nearly twenty years later, the poor count remains convinced that his son still lives, and would pay a sultan’s ransom for news of his whereabouts…

Carvallain: Hahaha… Ahahahahaha!

Carvallain: Truly a tragedy for the ages, and a testament to the misfortunes that may befall us should we act without…due consideration. But so long as you are prepared to abide the capricious whims of fate, I am willing to oblige you this once.

Carvallain: That said, in light of the recent rebellion, I trust you understand that I cannot deliver you to Doma itself. I can take you only as far as Kugane, in Hingashi.

Carvallain: We will require time to procure sufficient provisions and make ready for departure. I humbly suggest you do the same.

[We go shopping]

 Alphinaud: Suddenly, all those hours Tataru passed cavorting and capering at the Forgotten Knight seem rather better spent, do they not?

Alphinaud: That said, I had intended to press the point more obliquely… And there was something disconcerting about the pleasure Tataru took in making Captain Carvallain squirm…

Alphinaud: I say we should heed the captain’s advice and attend to our own preparations while they ready the vessel for departure.

Alphinaud: Tataru and I will procure the necessary supplies. Alisaie…I should be grateful if you would use the time to brief Urianger on recent developments. You may also wish to review the relevant safety procedures in the event of an emergency at sea.

Alisaie: How…how very prudent of you. Very well, I shall go and speak with him. What of Auric and Lyse?

Alphinaud: I would like the two of you to return to Revenant’s Toll and speak with our Doman allies. I fear we know too little of their homeland, and any information they can provide would be most welcome.

Alphinaud: When we have completed our respective tasks, we will reconvene here at the ferry docks. Agreed?

Lyse: Sounds like a plan! Let’s go, Auric!

 

[In Mor Dhona]

 

Lyse: Well, here we are. We’ll need to talk to lots of people, so I think we should split up.

Lyse: I’ll ask around at the House of Splendors. You take the Rising Stones. I’ll meet you here after. Got it?

 

[Rising Stones, talking to the Domans]

 

Higiri: Greetings, Auric. What brings you to the Toll this day?

Higiri: What? You are for Doma? Heavens… You Scions have shown us naught but kindness, but never in my wildest dreams did I imagine you would fight for our homeland…

Higiri: For twenty-five years we suffered under their tyranny. And then we spied an opportunity─the Emperor, dead! Garlemald in chaos!

Higiri: It seemed the time was ripe. Beneath our lord’s banners we gathered, and fought to reclaim our nation. But when Zenos arrived with the XIIth Legion, it was over in an instant…

 

Homei: You are truly planning to travel to Doma? I…I do not know what to say… Forgive me. I shall aid you to the best of my ability.

Homei: Ours is a beautiful land, nestled on the eastern coast of Othard. Along the banks of the One River, our nation thrived, proud and free, until the Garleans came, twenty-five years ago…

Homei: The river was our lifeblood, free to travel and to fish…but travel was soon restricted, and now the river belongs to none…

 

Hozan: Hm? What is it, my friend? You look as though you have something to ask.

Hozan: That you go to join Yugiri and Gosetsu in the fight fills me with such joy! Ah, forgive my exuberance. You require information, yes?

Hozan: We of the Nagae clan have served Doma faithfully for generations. My ancestors held positions within Doma Castle, even. Now it is home to the imperial viceroy’s witch, and her host of men and magitek.

Hozan: To think that what was once the shining symbol of our heritage─and the seat of dear Lord Kaien─has become a den for Garlean dogs…

 

[Outside by the Aether]

 

Lyse: Ah, there you are! Learn anything interesting? The older Domans I spoke with tried to teach me all about Far Eastern customs and the importance of formality and politeness…

Lyse: I’d like to think Eorzeans can be just as stiff and stuffy as anyone─especially Ishgardians─but anyway… Did you know they eat with sticks? It wasn’t all that hard, actually─or at least, that’s what I thought until they told me I was holding them wrong. And then when I spoke with the younger Domans, they just rolled their eyes and told me it was all a load of stupid old─ Hm?

Lyse: Wow… What you learned sounds a lot more useful. Unless someone invites us for dinner, of course. I hope they do.

Lyse: Right. No point waiting around here, is there?

Lyse: We should head back to Limsa Lominsa. Alphinaud said to meet at the ferry docks, I think?

 

 [At the ferry dock in Limsa]

 

Alphinaud: You are returned, Auric. I trust you learned much from our Doman friends in Revenant’s Toll.

Alphinaud: I am eager to hear all─though that can wait until we have left port. We will have time enough to talk on our journey to Kugane.

Alphinaud: Our spice-trading friends have completed their preparations. Assuming you have completed yours, you may inform the deckhand that we are ready to depart.

 

Kraken’s Arms Deckhand: All set, lad? I’ll see you to the ship if so.

 

[All aboard!]

 [Urianger comes walking up at the last moment.]

 

Urianger: Twelve be praised! Full sure was I that I had come too late.

Alisaie: Urianger? Tell me you haven’t come all this way just to see us off.

Urianger: Nay, my lady. Ere you quit these shores for eastern climes, I wished to share some words of seeming import.

Urianger: “Look ye where the sun doth rise, see crimson embers, dark’ning skies…Look ye where the sun doth fall, see azure lost amidst the squall.“

Alisaie: Well that sounds suitably foreboding. Another one of your prophecies, I presume?

Urianger: Of Far Eastern origin, aye. It is mine earnest hope that this ancient wisdom may serve to guide you on your journey, for what dangers lie in wait for you upon those distant shores are yet beyond my knowing.

Alisaie: <sigh> A parting gift befitting your roundabout ways. Thank you.

Urianger: I have more than words for you, my lady.

 

[Urianger presents a long rapier to Alisaie]

 Alisaie: It’s beautiful… Is it for me?

Urianger: Though undeniably powerful, your aetherial blade taxeth you greatly in the wielding. Not so this rapier, which shall serve you just as well ‘gainst all but the most formidable foe.

Alisaie: Impressive… It feels as though it’s attuned to my aether. I shall treasure it.

Carvallain: Honored guests! Say your farewells, for the moment of our parting draws nigh! A fair wind blows, and I mean to follow it!

 Alisaie: It would seem our ship is set to sail. Pray give my regards to Thancred and the others. And…take care.

 

[Aboard the Misery]

 

Carvallain: A fine day, is it not? Fair winds and following seas. The Misery is enjoying herself.

Carvallain: Nevertheless, it would not do for you to spend the entirety of our voyage above deck. Let me show you to your quarters.

 

[The ship shakes]

 

Krile: Is the ship supposed to do that?

Carvallain: Not under normal circumstances…

Kraken’s Arms Deckhand: Captain! You’re needed on deck. Somethin’ queer’s afoot. The winds died down, the waters went still, and all of a sudden we were dragged off-course…

Carvallain: “Dragged“? By what?

Kraken’s Arms Deckhand: Can’t rightly say, sir, but some of the lads are mutterin’ about seein’ things in the water. Things as shouldn’t be there…

Carvallain: Oh, for the love of─ If you will excuse me a moment.

 

[Carvallain turns to the Warrior of Light]

 

Carvallain: …Actually, might I persuade you to join me? Loath though I am to admit it, I have a bad feeling about this.

Carvallain: Hmm… Odd. Most odd.

Alphinaud: Well? Do you have any idea what’s going on?

Carvallain: …No. As the man said, despite the absence of wind and current, the Misery is somehow being pulled off-course.

Alisaie: Well, why not fire up the ceruleum engines you have hidden below?

Carvallain: An excellent suggestion based on knowledge you should not have. Alas, our engines appear to be malfunctioning for reasons that escape my engineers at present…

Kraken’s Arms Deckhand: I’m telling you, Captain, it’s them…things the lads saw…

Alphinaud: “Things“? I don’t suppose I could convince you to attempt something more descriptive? An adjective, for example.

Carvallain: Sea Wolf superstitions and faerie tales, naught more… But if you must know, the “things” which he is so reticent to name are the souls of deceased women said to lure sailors to their deaths.

Alphinaud: P-P-Preposterous!

Alisaie: Yeees, indeed… If it is neither the sea nor the weather which is responsible, then it is probably a predatory entity of some sort─perhaps a siren or some such.

Alisaie: For all we know, it could be a fellow “spice trader” employing magicks to seize and plunder passing vessels.

Alisaie: Regardless, we have but one recourse:  to let the current take us where it will, and deal with whatever we find there.

Carvallain: What a thoroughly pragmatic suggestion. Oh, I am beginning to like you, girl.

Alisaie: I assure you the feeling is not mutual. Once we arrive at our destination, be it a vessel or an island or something else, Lyse and I will remain with the ship to defend it in case of attack. Auric, I believe you would be the ideal choice to venture forth and deal with the cause of our troubles.

 

[ Dungeon:  The Ship Graveyard, level 61]

 

Alphinaud: Thank the Twelve!

Carvallain: Everything here would appear to be in order. Good. Repairs should be completed by the time we return to the Misery, whereupon we shall resume our journey without further delay.

Alphinaud: I swear, if I never hear another ghost story, it will be too soon…


[Arrival in Kugane. Lyse narrates: “I remember the sea. The smell of the salt and the crash of the waves as we drew closer to Kugane….The only port open to outsiders in Hingashi, across the Ruby Sea from Othard. From Doma. All the colors of the rainbow, all the peoples of the world, all in one palce. I wish you could have seen it….”]

Carvallain: Congratulations. You now stand in Kugane, the western port of Hingashi. Regrettably, the only port in this nation open to foreign trade.

Carvallain: Oh, and I do apologize for the unforeseen difficulties which befell us during our journey. Needless to say, your assistance in overcoming them was much appreciated.

Alphinaud: Glad though I am to have arrived, I would remind you all that we are far from home, with limited resources at our disposal…

 Alisaie: Duly noted, Brother. I shall take care not to enjoy myself. In any event, Doma is our final destination, and our first order of business should be to secure passage there.

 Alphinaud: Captain Carvallain, I realize you pledged only to take us as far as Kugane, and I have no desire to change the terms of our agreement. I should, however, be interested to know how you would go about reaching Othard, were you in our position.

 Carvallain: At the risk of stating the obvious…you are in a port. Surely there is a kind and generous soul here who will aid you for the right price? You cannot be the first travelers seeking passage to Doma.

 Alphinaud: …The captain makes a good point. ‘Tis like that Yugiri and Gosetsu were forced to come here for the selfsame reasons we were. They must have found a way to Othard─assuming they are not still in the city.

Alphinaud: Hmm… Ere we seek passage, mayhap we should first seek our friends.

Tataru: Leave it to me, Alphinaud! Making friendly inquiries is my specialty. Lest you forget, I got plenty of practice in Ishgard!

 Tataru: Captain Carvallain, could you direct us to the nearest tavern?

Carvallain: Desperate for a drink, are we? You may find one in that large building just beyond the pier.

 Carvallain: Whether your journeys have come to an end or are about to begin, the Shiokaze Hostelry is an ideal place to rest, relax, and reflect. Or so they say.

Carvallain: And with that, my dear Scions, I bid you farewell. As soon as we have replenished our supplies, we must away. Ours was ever a fast-moving business.

Alisaie: The “spice trade,” you mean?

Carvallain: But of course. Surely you did not think I traveled halfway around the world and delivered you to your destination solely out of the kindness of my heart?

Alphinaud: Perish the thought. Thank you, Captain, and may the Navigator watch over and keep you.

Alphinaud: Right, then. To the hostelry?

Tataru: After you!

 

 [In the hostelry lobby]

Alphinaud: By the Twelve… I thought Ishgard remarkable, but this… We are certainly not in Eorzea anymore.

Tataru: Hee hee hee! A tavern is a tavern, Alphinaud, here or anywhere else! Now, if you’ll excuse me, it’s time to do what I do best!

 

[Tataru starts to run off to find someone to cheat at cards, but bumps into a spectacles-wearing Hyur man.]

 

???: Oh! A thousand pardons, my lady.

???: The Scions of the Seventh Dawn, I presume? I hope your voyage was not too trying.

Alisaie: …And you are?

Hancock: Ah, yes, of course! Forgive me. Hancock, of the East Aldenard Trading Company, at your service. On behalf of Chairman Lolorito, I bid you welcome to Kugane, and invite you to take refreshments at our local offices.

 Alphinaud: Lolorito? I was aware his interests extended beyond the borders of Eorzea, but not so far as Kugane.

Alphinaud: Regardless, I am disinclined to accept the hospitality of grinning merchants─especially those who serve a master with whom we have such a difficult relationship.

Hancock: My, such naked suspicion!

 Hancock: I do hope that business with the Crystal Braves did not rob you of all faith in your fellow man. Or do you really think the chairman is plotting to drag you into another one of his grand schemes?

Alphinaud: I beg your pardon!? If you are trying to win my trust, you are failing quite spectacularly.

Hancock: Oh dear, have I offended you?

Hancock: Once again, I must apologize. Too much time in the Far East, you see. One is compelled to talk in circles around everything here, and one finds oneself longing for the invigoratingly candid speech of the Ul’dahn markets…though I see now that this was neither the time nor the place to indulge said longing.

Hancock: …Might I suggest that we continue this conversation at the company offices? Too many eyes and ears here, you understand. ‘Twould be decidedly reckless to say any more.

Alphinaud: If I may favor you with the invigorating candor you apparently crave─it would be decidedly reckless to follow a man I neither know nor trust. Give me one good reason why we should accept Lord Lolorito’s invitation.

Hancock: Now, there’s the young diplomat I was told to expect! Very well, then, I shall explain. You understand that you are come to a most reclusive and secretive nation, yes? One whose borders are closed to foreign trade save at this single port?

Hancock: Then it should come as no surprise that a great many parties have vested interests here. Merchants like myself are a given, of course, but for every one of us, you may be certain there is also an agent of a foreign government.

 Hancock: Many notable nations and empires have embassies here, you know─including, of course, the Garlean Empire, with whom you have such a…difficult relationship.

Alisaie: To paraphrase, Kugane is teeming with imperial spies, one or several of whom could now be listening to our every word.

Hancock: Something to that effect, yes. Beneath this veneer of bustling trade, a war for supremacy is being waged between world powers. One might say we were standing on the front lines…just not in public.

Alisaie: I still have my doubts, but he may have a point. I say we accept his invitation─for now.

Hancock: And you must be Auric Seagard! Slayer of Gods… Rider of Dragons… Savior of Ishgard… Stealer of Pants─if some of the more puzzling rumors are to be believed.

Hancock: I knew it! May I say what an honor and a pleasure it is to make your acquaintance, good sir. I just know you and I are going to get along famously!

Hancock: Now then, without further ado, allow me to escort you to the company offices.

Hancock: This being your first visit to our fair city, I shall make an effort to point out various landmarks along the way. If you would be so good as to follow me!

[The Grand Tour]:

Hancock: Everyone! If I could have your attention, please. You are now standing in Tenkonto.

Hancock: Loosely translated, the name means “spire of drifting souls,” which─as some of you may have deduced─makes reference to the aetheryte which stands over yonder.

Alphinaud: Hmm… The design is markedly different from those of Sharlayan, yet I trust its function is identical?

Hancock: A diplomat and a scholar! Will wonders never cease.

Hancock: Far Eastern aetheryte technologies have a long and storied tradition, I assure you. This particular example was constructed by the Onishishu, a collective of skilled craftsmen, who guard their ancestral techniques with the utmost secrecy.

Hancock: In short, you will find it no less reliable than its western counterparts. Attune, if you like.

Hancock: Beautiful though it may be, we cannot spend all day staring at the aetheryte.

Hancock: Come, come, let us move along. The markets are next!

Hancock: We have arrived at the largest shopping district in Kugane:  Kogane Dori!

Hancock: “Kugane,“ as you are doubtless unaware, is an ancient Hingan word for gold. So, in this prosperous port where golden fortunes are made, lesser fortunes, or ”kogane,“ are earned by the local merchants. It’s all quite logical once you learn the language.

Tataru: Heh heh heh… Now you’re beginning to speak my language…

Hancock: Oho! A kindred spirit! What a pleasure it is to meet a young lady who appreciates the value of hard-won coin!

???: Hancock of the East Aldenard Trading Company. You are with clients today?

Hancock: Why, if it isn’t Master Keiten! Pray allow me to introduce to you my esteemed guests, but recently come from distant Eorzea.

Hancock: This kind and generous soul supervises all transactions here in Kogane Dori.

Keiten: Your sincerity is ever appreciated. As he says, I am Keiten of the Hakuuchi clan, and it is my honor to serve as overseer of these markets.

Keiten: As we receive many foreign visitors in Kugane, we accept all manner of currencies. Rest assured, your Eorzean gil are welcome here. I invite you to peruse our wares at your leisure.

Hancock: Arms, armor, foodstuffs, potables─here you will find all of them and more.

Hancock: If we may pause here for a moment…

Hancock: This road leads to the Ijin-gai

Alphinaud: Would this also be where the foreign embassies are found─including that of a certain empire?

Hancock: Precisely. So you see, it would not be at all unusual to cross paths with one of our Garlean cousins here. With this in mind, I would encourage you to choose your words carefully. We would not want any physical altercations, after all, such spats being strictly forbidden!

Hancock: The Sekiseigumi punish breaches of the peace quite severely. I have seen foreigners permanently exiled for a single violation─though, to be fair, this is not common. More often than not, they are executed on the spot.

Lyse: What, cut down then and there!? You’re joking, right?

Hancock: Would that I were, but alas, these samurai are a humorless lot.

Hancock: Why, I recall one instance when a foreign merchant in his cups dared lay hands upon a Hingan aristocrat in front of a Sekiseigumi. The samurai cut him in half with a single stroke.

Lyse: Ugh, I don’t even want to think about that…

Hancock: So, as you see, it would behoove you to behave. Failing that, we may be forced to “part ways” with one another─or you with yourselves, in the manner of the late Teledji Adeledji!

[Hancock laughs uproariously. The group stares at him.]

Hancock: …Oh, how I amuse myself. But we must carry on! I have yet to show you the Garlean Consulate!

Hancock: This, as you may have surmised, is the consulate of you-know-who. Mark the guards at the gate─are their uniforms not different from those you have seen in the West?

Hancock: Were you to travel far and wide, you would find that many such variations exist, often inspired by local designs. All of which goes to show that even a massive empire seeking to rule all of creation is not without its artisans!

Hancock: There is oh so much more I could speak of─the soothing waters of the onsen, the ephemeral delights of the pleasure district─but you are doubtless still weary from your long sea voyage.

Hancock: Let us retire to the company offices.

East Aldenard Trading Company Aide: Greetings, sirs and ladies, and welcome to the Kugane branch offices of the East Aldenard Trading Company.

Hancock: At long last, we arrive at our destination. May I present to you our humble offices.

Hancock: We have much to discuss, so I will refrain from further prattle. Come, come, right this way!

Hancock: Our thaumaturges took great pains to ward these walls against all manner of surveillance. Where business dealings are concerned, we do not compromise on confidentiality.

Hancock: You may avail yourselves of these offices for the duration of your visit. Come and go as you like, and know that you may speak freely here.

Alphinaud: Your offer is most generous, but I will not enter into any agreement which would leave us beholden to you or your master.

Hancock: A legitimate concern. Allow me to clarify, then:  the chairman bids you consider this as an expression of his heartfelt contrition for the bloody banquet and the unpleasantness which followed.

Hancock: Never having been one to put stock in words alone, the chairman deems the provision of material aid to be a more appropriate demonstration of his sincerity.

Hancock: By sheer coincidence, your purpose here also happens to coincide with our own interests. That is, assuming you are come to aid the Doman Liberation Front?

Alphinaud: How could─ …Hm. I will not bother to offer a denial. Aye, you have the right of it. To be specific, we are come in search of our Far Eastern allies, Yugiri and Gosetsu, whom we hope to assist in their fight.

Hancock: The Auri shinobi and the Roegadyn samurai? Then you will be pleased to know that they have both come to Kugane.

Lyse: Are you sure?

Hancock: Quite. They came here aboard a company vessel, you see. However, they encountered difficulties securing passage across the Ruby Sea.

Lyse: The Ruby Sea? Sorry, I’ve never been any good at geography.

Hancock: Forgive me. This calls for a map.

Hancock: We are here, in Kugane. The sole open port of Hingashi, situated on her western coast.

Hancock: Doma, meanwhile, is here, on the eastern coast of Othard, in Yanxia.

Hancock: Therefore, if your friends are to reach Doma, they must first cross the Ruby Sea.

Hancock: Alas, this is easier said than done as the Ruby Sea does not fall within the dominion of either Hingashi or Doma, being controlled since antiquity by a third party:  namely, the Confederacy.

Hancock: Said maritime collective is known for the consummate skill of its sailors…and for demanding that any vessel entering its waters pay a toll referred to as the “Ruby Tithe.” In exchange, the Confederacy’s vast fleet “guarantees the safety” of those who travel within its territory.

Hancock: Now, as I am sure you are aware, Garlemald conquered Doma some twenty-five years past, at which time the Empire saw no value in controlling the Ruby Sea. And thus did they turn a blind eye to the activities of the Confederacy.

Hancock: The recently appointed acting imperial viceroy of Doma had other ideas, however. She has formally condemned the Confederacy and declared that any who recognize their authority shall be branded enemies of the Empire.

Hancock: Bowing to this pressure, Hingashi severed ties with these toll-takers and forbade the payment of the Ruby Tithe, prompting the Confederacy to make it known that any merchants choosing to sail the Ruby Sea would do so at their peril…

Alisaie: No wonder they struggled to secure passage to Doma. What captain would risk such a journey given the circumstances?

Hancock: I am told your friends were not so easily deterred from their course, but I know not whether their persistence bore fruit.

Alphinaud: I say we follow in Yugiri and Gosetsu’s footsteps and attempt to secure passage to Doma for ourselves. We will need to cross the sea in any case, and we may learn something of their whereabouts in the process.

Alphinaud: And should we find that they are still in Kugane, we can make the journey together.

Hancock: In that case, I have some information which may be of use to you. No quid pro quo, I assure you─the chairman was most insistent that I aid you to the best of my ability…

Alphinaud: Though I am reluctant to take any action whatsoever that could be construed as placing ourselves in Lord Lolorito’s debt…we must avail ourselves of what means are available.

Alphinaud: Our Ala Mhigan allies placed their faith in us, and I do not intend to disappoint them…

Alphinaud: It would seem inefficient for us all to venture out together in search of information on Yugiri and Gosetsu’s whereabouts. Agreed?

Alisaie: Agreed. We need to cast our net wider─split up and pursue all available avenues of inquiry. But if we’re to coordinate our efforts effectively, we’ll need to establish a working base of operations here.

Alphinaud: Indeed. Tataru would seem best suited to the task of organizing our supplies and procuring new ones.

Alphinaud: While she attends to that, we four can begin our search by questioning the individuals Hancock identified. Alisaie and I will take those in the southern districts of the city, and the two of you can take those in the north.

Alphinaud: In, uh…anticipation of just such an eventuality, I took the liberty of preparing some few sketches of Yugiri and Gosetsu during our voyage.

Lyse: Wow… Y’shtola warned me that you were a bit of an artist, but these are great! They’ll definitely come in handy.

Lyse: Looks like it’s you and me, Auric. Let’s step outside and talk about where to start!

Lyse: Wow, Alphinaud’s sketches are so… I don’t know how to put it, but they’re very…

Lyse: Well, see for yourself!

 Lyse: It looks more like them than they do! Honestly, he could make a living doing this…

Lyse: Ah, sorry, sorry! No time for distractions! Why don’t we start by visiting…Karaku at the…on-something? Onsun? Onsan? Onsen! That was it!

 [At the spa]

Karaku: Come one, come all! Burns, cuts, embarrassing rashes─there is naught that the mystical waters of the Bokaisen Hot Springs cannot heal!

Karaku: Ho, what is that in your hand?

Karaku: Hmm…you seek this Au Ra and this Roegadyn, do you?

Karaku: A thousand apologies, but I cannot help you. It is against our policy to divulge information regarding patrons past or present.

Lyse: Please! We came all the way from Eorzea to find our friends!

Karaku: We have our reputation to consider, miss. Men and women from all walks of life come here in search of rejuvenation─body and soul.

Karaku: They seek privacy and discretion, and we have ever honored their wishes. Only the Sekiseigumi may demand otherwise. I am sorry, but there is naught I can do.

Lyse: I suppose we’ll just have to ask someone else, then. What about that woman who runs the hostelry? Kotokaze, was it?

Kotokaze: Welcome, traveler. Can I interest you in some rice wine? Exceptional quality, delivered but the other day…

 Kotokaze: …Ah. An Auri shinobi and a Roegadyn samurai. If I may, I would answer your question with some few of mine own.

Kotokaze: If I speak of that which you know, ijin, be not offended. You are familiar with the situation in the lands across the Ruby Sea? The doomed rebellion, after two and a half decades of quiet?

Kotokaze: I see. And you are familiar with the ways of Hingashi? How we elect to stand apart and support no cause but our own? Indifferent and callous, some may call us, but pragmatism is essential if a humble island nation such as ours is to survive.

Kotokaze: But we are not fools. Complete isolation is impractical. And so Kugane is open to ijin, and we are equally hospitable to all. Or, if I must speak more plainly: Yes, I can help you. But if I do, I must also oblige the ones who ask after you.

Kotokaze: Are you willing to accept this fair and equitable treatment?

Lyse: If anyone comes looking for us, tell them whatever you like.

Kotokaze: As you wish. The two individuals of whom you speak did indeed come here. They sought passage across the Ruby Sea.

Kotokaze: Few ships are willing to make the trip at the moment. Nevertheless, I made several introductions on their behalf. That was the extent of our interaction.

Kotokaze: I will provide you with the names of the captains, if you like.

Lyse: You’ve been a great help, Mistress Kotokaze. I’ll be sure to come back for that wine sometime.

Kotokaze: We would welcome your custom, miss.

Lyse: We should question these captains as soon as we can. You take the first three, I’ll take the rest, and we’ll meet here when we’ve finished. All right? Good luck!

 

Curt Captain: …Yes, a Roegadyn gentleman did approach me. He wanted to charter a ship to take him across the Ruby Sea, the mad devil.

Curt Captain: I sent him away, like all the others before him. The woman? Nay, I know her not.

 

Hannish Spice Trader: You ask me if I have seen this Auri woman and this Roegadyn samurai? Hmm… The woman is unknown to me, but the man is not.

Hannish Spice Trader: He was for Doma, but I could not help him. We travel solely between here and Radz-at-Han. It would be an unreasonable detour.

 

Meticulous Merchant: Passengers? No. We no longer offer that service. Too much trouble. Now, we only transport goods. I told this to the samurai and sent him on his way.

Meticulous Merchant: The woman? Pah. If it is women you seek, the pleasure houses have plenty.

 

Lyse: How did it─ Oh. Never mind. Judging from the look on your face, you didn’t have much better luck than I did…

Lyse: Well, I suppose we might as well head back to─ Wait! I’ve just remembered!

Lyse: There was someone on my list I forgot to visit: Gyodo.

Lyse: He’s a “Namazu” fisherman─whatever that means─and a regular here. Maybe we’ll find him if we look around?

 [He’s a short talking catfish standing on his hind legs with a bell around his neck.  Being on land apparently isn’t bothering him.]

Gyodo: …What, what? Why do you stare? You have business with me?

Lyse: By the Twelve, a talking fish!

Gyodo: Yes, yes, a talking fish. How very observant of you, ijin. <sigh> You find me in good spirits, so your rudeness I will ignore this once─but only if you address me again in the proper manner.

Lyse: Sorry, I’ve never met a─ Let’s start again. You’re Gyodo, right? My name is Lyse, and this is Auric. We’re looking for some friends of ours…

Gyodo: I see, I see… Both these ones I know well. I helped them secure passage across the Ruby Sea.

Lyse: Really? That’s wonderful! Could you do the same for us?

Gyodo: Yes, yes, this would not be a problem. For you, I could charter a ship this very day.

Gyodo: But the journey is fraught with much peril! The fare will not be cheap. Are you sure you can afford to pay?

 Lyse: I didn’t think to bring any money…but surely Tataru will let us take whatever we need from the Scions’ coffers, right?

 Lyse: We wouldn’t be the only passengers, though… Could we take a moment to talk it over with our friends?

Gyodo: Yes, yes, but hurry! Your ship must depart under cover of darkness. We shall meet again at sunset on the Tasogare Bridge. Do not forget your fare! Bring many gil, yes!?

Lyse: It’s about time our luck changed! Alphinaud and the others will be thrilled!

 [In the Ruby Bazaar offices]:

Alphinaud: We spoke with a number of merchants and captains at the southern piers.

Alphinaud: Several recognized Gosetsu and confirmed that he had been searching for a vessel to deliver him to Othard. None, however, made any mention of Lady Yugiri…

Lyse: Yes, it was the same story for us─and then you’ll never believe what happened…!

Alphinaud: …So this Gyodo claims to have aided both Gosetsu and Yugiri? How fortuitous.

Hancock: Not the word I would have chosen, Master Alphinaud.

Tataru: Stupid’s what I’d call it! How can you agree to his price without making any attempt to haggle? Or even confirming what it was in the first place!?

Hancock: Yes…that too was a misstep on their part, but it is not what troubles me most. Gyodo and his brethren are not renowned for their generosity of spirit. Rather, they are disdained as scheming moneylenders, ever eager to turn a profit from others’ misfortune.

Alisaie: Everyone else we questioned stated that Gosetsu was alone. Only Gyodo claims to have met both him and Yugiri…

Alisaie: I suppose it’s just possible that Gosetsu made inquiries by himself, and only called upon Yugiri once he had found a willing captain…?

Hancock: …But it is equally possible─if not more likely─that you are being deceived. Do not forget that there are parties present in Kugane with agendas which may run contrary to your own.

Hancock: The viceroy was once a spy herself, as I recall. I should be surprised if she did not have countless agents here in her employ─all eager to prove themselves to their new master. And what better way to do so than by delivering her the heads of foreign insurgents?

Lyse: Fine. You may be right about him. But if Gyodo’s working for the Empire, who’s to say he didn’t try the same trick on Yugiri and Gosetsu? I mean, if he did, he might know where they are. And if he succeeded, they might be in trouble!

Lyse: Anyway, if he holds up his end of the bargain, we’ll have nothing to worry about, will we? But if he tries to betray us, I vote we take him prisoner and punch him till he tells us the truth.

Alisaie: So, if it’s a trap, we’ll spring it and deal with the consequences. Hmm…I like the way you think.

Alphinaud: <sigh> Very well… We should prepare for the worst. Tataru will remain here, and I shall follow the three of you at a discreet distance.

Hancock: Once more, I must caution you to avoid physical altercations at all costs─even should imperial agents attempt to engage you. The Sekiseigumi will not hesitate to clap you in irons…or cut you down.

Hancock: If anything untoward should happen, you are to return here at once. Is that clear?

Alisaie: To review: The viceroy was once a spy herself, as I recall. I should be surprised if she did not have countless agents here in her employ─all eager to prove themselves to their new master. And what better way to do so than by delivering her the heads of foreign insurgents?

Alisaie: Alphinaud will keep watch from a distance, ready to provide support in the likely event that Gyodo attempts to betray us to the imperials or whomever else.

Alisaie: Should that happen, you and Lyse will subdue him, and together we will make our escape.

Alisaie: As our actions will surely draw the attention of the Sekiseigumi, we will evade them with Alphinaud’s assistance and return here with our prisoner. Does that meet with everyone’s approval?

Alisaie: Of course, these precautions will be for naught if Gyodo does not play us for fools…but we shall see. To the bridge!

[At the bridge]

Alisaie: Our would-be ally is nowhere to be seen… Make ready, Auric. Something smells…fishy…

Alisaie: He’s late…

[Gyodo waddles up.]

Gyodo: Endless and most sincere apologies to you and yours, yes, yes. This way, this way. Quickly now!

Alisaie: Enough. Where are you taking us? Where is the ship?

Gyodo: The ship, the ship… So very sorry to inform you, yes, yes. Long before was it pledged to another.

Gyodo: To me, to me! These ones are for Doma!

[Several Imperial soldiers appear]

Lyse: <sigh> I knew it couldn’t be this simple…

Gyodo: Nothing personal, yes, yes? Just business.

Lyse: Then business is about to take a turn for the worse…

[Lyse punches out Gyodo and slings the traitorous fish over her shoulder.]

Lyse: Come on, let’s find a way out of here!

Alphinaud: Disappointing, but not surprising. In retrospect, we probably should have─

Alisaie: Quiet, Brother! Fight now, talk after!

 Lyse: I’ll hold on to Gyodo! You deal with the imperials!

 [FIGHT! Alphinaud, Alisaie, and the Warrior of Light against five Imperial soldiers. No sweat. But alarm whistles sound nearby.]

Alisaie: As expected, the Sekiseigumi have caught our scent. Since fighting them is out of the question, we’ll have to wind our way back to the Ruby Bazaar, evading their patrols as we go.

Alisaie: If they find you, use these smoke bombs to make your escape!

[Alisaie hands over nine smoke bombs. It’s a sneaking mission, Snake of Light!]

Alphinaud: Split up and head for the Ruby Bazaar! And remember: under no circumstances must you engage the Sekiseigumi!

Sekiseigumi Blade: You there! Lay down your arms and surrender at once!

Lyse: Dammit, they’ve found us! Use a smoke bomb so we can escape!

 

[Poof!]

 

Lyse: Nice work! Now, let’s find a way out of here…

Lyse: <huff> <puff> That was close. Now, which way to the Ruby Bazaar…?

Lyse: The streets are crawling with Sekiseigumi…Keep those smoke bombs ready.

Lyse: Oh bugger─they’ve got a whole squadron out front! What do we do now, Auric?

[Suddenly a Ninja Turtle appears. No that is not a typo.]

Curious Kojin: Come with me. I will guide you to your friends.

Lyse: First a talking fish, and now a tortoise? <sigh>What have we got to lose?

[The Ninja Turtle leads the group away from the guards]

Alphinaud: Thank the Twelve you made it! I feared our Kojin friend might not find you in time.

Curious Kojin: Everything is going to be all right. Trust me…

[Three guards approach the hiding spot]

Curious Kojin: Stay hidden and quiet. Understood?

[The Ninja Turtle steps out into the road.]

Sekiseigumi Blade: Clear the road! Clear the road!

Sekiseigumi Blade: You there, Kojin! We seek four foreigners─one a brutish woman carrying an unconscious Namazu. Have you seen them?

Curious Kojin: Four foreigners, you say? Ah, yes! Very rude they were, making no apology as they barged past. They went that way, I think.

Sekiseigumi Blade: Many thanks, good sir!

Sekiseigumi Blade: With me! They cannot have gone far!

[The guards run off in the wrong direction.]

Curious Kojin: All is well. The Sekiseigumi will not return this way for some time, I should think.

Curious Kojin: You are of the East Aldenard Trading Company, yes? Come with me.I know a safer way.

[The Ninja Turtle leads the group to a back entrance of the Ruby Bazaar where Hancock is waiting.]

Hancock: You are returned─and with guests, I see.

[Lyse drops the twitching catfish-man onto the floor.]

Lyse: Our meeting went about as well as expected. We’ve brought the Namazu who thought to betray us. When he wakes up, we’ll see what he knows about Yugiri and Gosetsu.

Hancock: Well done you. When I saw the Sekiseigumi out in force, I did begin to worry, but I see my fears were misplaced.

Lyse: Actually, if it weren’t for Soroban, we might not’ve gotten away…

[She points to the Ninja Turtle, whose name it seems is Soroban.]

Soroban: ‘Twas my pleasure.

Alphinaud: Yet I must ask, Soroban: why would you deceive the Sekiseigumi to help us─foreigners of whom you know naught?

Soroban: Why, out of the kindness of my heart…is what I would like to say, but my motives are not so pure.

Soroban: I chanced to witness your meeting with Hancock at the tavern, and saw an opportunity.

Hancock: An opportunity?

Soroban: Like many, I came to Kugane as a trader to make my fortune.Kojin of the Red may serve the Empire as mercenaries, but Kojin of the Blue walk a different path.

Soroban: Regretfully, most here would rather not meet our gaze, much less do business.

Soroban: So I seek the custom of those less predisposed to dismiss us outright. Namely, the East Aldenard Trading Company.

Alphinaud: Quid pro quo, is it? Well, there is no denying that we owe you a debt. What say you, Hancock? Will you consider doing business with our entrepreneurial friend here?

Hancock: Rest assured, Master Soroban, that in matters of trade the company does not discriminate. We would be honored to hear your proposal.

Soroban: I promise you will not regret this, good sir!

Soroban: Ah, yes─you sought passage across the Ruby Sea, did you not? I have a ship you can use.

Alphinaud: You do? Well, then! Far be it from us to refuse! You have our deepest thanks.

Soroban: And you mine

Lyse: I’m still annoyed he tried to deceive us, but at least we were prepared for it.

Lyse: Even so, next time we should probably try to avoid running around Kugane in the middle of the night with half the city guard snapping at our heels…

Lyse: Right, then. Gyodo should be coming round soon.

Lyse: I think it’s time we had a little chat, don’t you?

Lyse: Rise and shine, little fishy. I know you can hear me, so stop pretending to be asleep or I’ll give you another ride on my boot.

Gyodo: …No! No, no, no more boots! All my secrets are yours for the asking!

Lyse: Tell us what you know about Yugiri and Gosetsu. Every last detail.

Lyse: And if I find out later that you lied to me─

Gyodo: No, no, no more lies! The clear, unvarnished truth! You have my word!

Gyodo: Only the samurai did I meet. Yes, yes, only him! He asked after a ship, so I provided an introduction to…to the Garleans…

Alisaie: You mean you led him into a trap, as you did us. Because you are an imperial spy.

Gyodo: No, no, I am no spy! It was just business! Fewer ships pass through Kugane these days, and we have struggled to make ends meet…

Gyodo: So when the Garleans offered a bounty for any Domans found in Kugane─

Alisaie: Oh, my mistake! You’re not a spy, but a common cutthroat! Not that I’m surprised─you need half a brain to be a spy. So what happened to the samurai?

Gyodo: Such a cruel, vicious tongue you have…He would not go quietly, no, no. Blades were drawn, men were cut down, and the Sekiseigumi came. They took the samurai away.

Hancock: Hold on a moment! You mean to tell me the ijin they arrested the other day was Gosetsu?

Hancock: Oh, had I but known! If he is in the custody of the Sekiseigumi, I need only see to it that the requisite funds find their way into the right official’s hands, and your friend will walk free.

Alphinaud: As it is in Ul’dah, so it is in Kugane…but given the circumstances, it seems we have no choice but to resort to morally questionable means.

Hancock: We’ll make a pragmatist of you yet, Master Alphinaud!

Hancock: You are free to wait here while I speak with the relevant official, but if you would rather wait for Gosetsu outside the barracks, we can go together.

Alisaie: I wouldn’t put it past the imperials to try something again, so mayhap it would be best if Lyse, Auric, and I joined you.

Lyse: All right, but what about Gyodo?

Alphinaud: I will keep an eye on him for the time being. We can release him after you return with Gosetsu. He will doubtless have some choice words to say to the little fellow. Soroban─mayhap it would be prudent to prepare your ship for our immediate departure.

Soroban: As you wish!

Hancock: Everything is in order? Then let us be off. The Sekiseigumi Barracks are to the north.

 [At the Barracks]

Hancock: I must ask that you wait here. You may be assured that this will not take long.

Lyse: …Is it really going to be as simple as he says, do you think?

[We wait.]

Lyse: …He said it wouldn’t take long, right? Because this feels a bit long to me.

Alisaie: Calm down, Lyse. Everything is going to be all right. Much as I hate to admit it, I share Hancock’s dim view of government officials and their supposed incorruptibility.

Alisaie: From what I’ve gleaned of the Far East, they’re probably exchanging lengthy pleasantries. There seems to be a correct way to do everything here, bribery being no exception. I say we leave them to it. Right, Auric?

Lyse: Right, right. Everything’s fine. Probably. I mean, it couldn’t be as bad as the last time we stood around waiting for something to happen…

[We wait some more.]

[Suddenly a shout from the barracks!]

Gosetsu: Have at you! AAAHHH!

Lyse: Was that…?

Lyse: That was Gosetsu! I’m sure of it! He’s in trouble!

[Lyse runs into the barracks]

Alisaie: Lyse, wai─ <sigh> …I suppose we should follow her, then.

[Inside the barracks, Gosetsu is… ]

[…having a friendly sparring match with some of the guards.]

Sekiseigumi Blade: Victory to the samurai!

Gosetsu: Hah hah hah hah hah! How many is that, now? Ten in a row?

Lyse: Gosetsu!

Gosetsu: Oho! This is a surprise! What in blue blazes are you three doing here?

Lyse: I could ask you the same thing! We’ve been looking all over for you─and then I suddenly heard you screaming!

Alisaie: …So, in summary: you started a brawl with some off-duty imperial soldiers and were subsequently arrested by the Sekiseigumi, whom you somehow befriended and convinced to set you free if you could defeat a given number of them in single combat?

Gosetsu: Ten bouts for my freedom, aye!’Tis but a pity you came too late to witness the last one.

Gosetsu: And with that, I am free to go, yes?

Sekiseigumi Blade: Our word, once given, may not be broken─but we pray you make every effort to avoid future altercations.

Sekiseigumi Blade: Circumstances notwithstanding, my lord, we are honored and grateful to have witnessed firsthand the skill of a Doman samurai.

[Hancock walks up]

Hancock: Ah. And we had just concluded negotiations.I gather my assistance was not required?

[A collective shrug. The group walks out of the barracks with Gosetsu in tow.]

Gosetsu: I must apologize. That you endured such trials and tribulations in search of me─

Alisaie: There’s no need for that. You had no way of knowing we would come looking for you.

Alisaie: You were after a ship to take you to Doma, yes? It just so happens we have found a willing captain.

Gosetsu: Truly? What fortune!

Alisaie: We will tell you all about it back at the company offices. Alphinaud and Tataru are waiting for us there.

[Back at the Ruby Bazaar office]

Alphinaud: Gosetsu! Thank the Twelve you are unharmed!

Gosetsu: As you can see, Master Alphinaud, I am the very picture of health!

Gosetsu: You! Vile fiend! Malevolent trickster! How kind the kami are to grant me vengeance so soon. But first, I demand you return the coin you so villainously embezzled from me!

Gyodo: Y-You have every right to be angry, good sir! Gladly would I return to you your coin…had I not been forced to repay certain gambling debts beforehand…

Alphinaud: Setting that matter aside for the moment─where is Lady Yugiri? Was she not traveling with you?

Gosetsu: For a time, aye, but we parted ways some while ago, the better to improve our chances of finding Lord Hien.

Lyse: Lord Hien?

Gosetsu: Forgive me, I have yet to explain. Lord Hien is the heir to Doma’s throne, and our master.

Gosetsu: His was a passionate voice for the cause of Doman liberation, and when we learned of the Emperor’s death, it only grew louder…

Alphinaud: So you seized upon the opportunity and rose up to reclaim your freedom…only for your hopes to be dashed when Zenos led his army unto your lands.

Gosetsu: The crown prince was a merciless foe. Against him and the might of the XIIth, we had no chance.

Gosetsu: Once Lord Hien understood this, he bade Yugiri take to the sea with as many of our people as possible. He, however, would stand and fight, that they might have more time to escape…

Gosetsu: I remained by his side as well, and together we carried on our doomed war. And then, one day, in a fierce battle, we were separated. I knew not what became of him─only that he was beyond the Empire’s reach, and that to find him, I would need Yugiri’s aid.

Gosetsu: The situation grows more perilous by the day, for the new viceroy, Yotsuyu, is a black-hearted villainess who delights in the torment of our people. There is naught she would not do to further her pursuit of Lord Hien.

Alphinaud: Thank you. I believe that makes matters a good deal clearer.

Alphinaud: It should please you to learn that we are come to aid the Doman Liberation Front in resuming their efforts to overthrow their imperial oppressors.

Gosetsu: Then allow me to join you! My inquiries here bore no fruit, hence my desire to return to Othard.

Gosetsu: Once there, I can lead you to our headquarters in Yanxia, where we shall all be reunited with Yugiri!

Alisaie: Mayhap not all. Alphinaud’s talents would seem better applied here in Kugane, working closely with Tataru and Hancock to feed us intelligence. There is a Garlean embassy just down the road, after all─

Alphinaud: While I appreciate the vote of confidence, I should be glad to accompany you all─

Alisaie: As a soldier in the field, so to speak? Come now, Brother, a competent commander assigns his soldiers the tasks best suited to them─as you of all people should know. And you are so very good at espionage and intrigue.

Alphinaud: “…For we all must serve, each in our own way.“ Very well. It would seem my place is here.

[Alphinaud is upset that he’s to be left behind.]

Tataru: Soroban is waiting at the pier. Have fun, you lot!

 [At the docks]

Soroban: I have been waiting for you, my friends. All preparations have been completed, and my ship awaits its passengers.

Soroban: Shall we depart without further delay?

[“After you, my shelled friend!”]


[Lyse narrates: “I remember the water. How it turned crimson in the morning sun. A shimmering sea of rubies, stretching from horizon to horizon. You could almost believe it went on forever…But beyond that red expanse lay a land in turmoil. On the shores of Othard, our Doman brothers struggled in vain…”]

Soroban: How wide and beautiful she is, the Ruby Sea! Filled with promise and adventure and treasures─many wonderful treasures!

Soroban: Now, in order to reach the shores of Othard, you will need to cross the resplendent waters you see before you. However, this is easier said than done.

Soroban: To set forth without making the necessary preparations is to invite the Confederacy to claim your vessel─and your life should you resist.

Soroban: But this fate can be avoided by paying the Ruby Tithe, thereby earning you the blessing of the pirate lords.

Soroban: So─let us go and greet them. Our destination is the isle to the west.

Lyse: That doesn’t look very far to me. Auric, why don’t we jump in and swim for it? I’ve had my fill of boats.

Soroban: Hmm, an excellent idea! I think you shall find the water to your liking.

Soroban: I will use my ship to deliver those less inclined to the isle.

[Splash! Into the ocean!]

Lyse: Right, this should be easy! And a good way to loosen up before the next fight, whenever it comes.

Lyse: Twenty gil says I beat you there!

[On the other side of the lagoon]

Soroban: Ah, there you are. I trust you enjoyed yourselves.

Soroban: Follow me, my friends. The one with whom we must speak is a man named Tansui.

Tansui: …I fear you have the advantage of me.

Tansui: Most honorable and esteemed Auric Seagard. I am Tansui, a humble mate who serves at the pleasure of the Confederacy’s captain.

Tansui: As you are in the company of the shellback, I presume we have business to discuss…

Tansui: You wish to pay the Ruby Tithe, yes? With your…gil, perhaps? It is just as well. Foreign currencies are in demand these days.

Soroban: I would pay for their passage to Othard.

Soroban: Does this sum meet with your satisfaction?

Tansui: …The sea has been quite tempestuous of late. I cannot say with confidence that you would reach your destination safely─unless you tripled it.

Soroban: D-Do you take me for a fool? I know the price, as do all!

Tansui: Alas, we live in interesting times. As you came from Kugane, I should think I need not tell you that.

Tansui: The shadow of war looms. The wise and the cautious shirk our waters and our custom, and the foolhardy sharpen their knives in anticipation.

Lyse: Meaning…?

[A Confederate runs up]

Proud Confederate: Sir! Sir! You’ve got to come quickly. The bastards’re at it again!

Proud Confederate: I tried to convince them to stop, but they weren’t having it.

Tansui: <sigh> Very well. I will be there shortly.

Tansui: …Hm. A proposition. Your comrades strike me as a worthwhile investment. I would not hear men name me a cat before koban, so I shall consider their tithe paid─not for what they have done, but for what I expect they will do.

[Tansui runs off with the messenger.]

Alisaie: I’m not sure what to make of that man, but at least the matter of our tithe is settled. For now.

Lyse: What was that he and the other pirate were talking about? Maybe we ought to go and have a look.

[Sure, why not!]

[The group arrives at another beach and watches from behind a rock. Tensui and the messenger are confronting a boat with an Imperial soldier and two Ninja Turtles in it.  Soroban looks surprised and/or upset.]

Imperial Pilus Prior: Spare me your concern, pirate.Your feeble attempts at extortion will not work on us.

Imperial Pilus Prior: You remain at large because we allow it─because you are such insignificant little pests that we see no need to swat you.

Imperial Pilus Prior: But if you wish to risk the ire of the viceroy, by all means, fire upon an imperial vessel. Give us a reason to bring the full might of the Garlean Empire to bear against your pathetic fleet.

Proud Confederate: Bastards!

[The messenger raises his bow. Tensui stops him.]

Tansui: Gentlemen. Surely the fact that you have such limitless resources at your disposal gives you all the more reason to spare some few coins for theless fortunate?

 Imperial Pilus Prior: All talk, just as I thought. Come─let us away. I have no time for this rubbish.

[The boat leaves.]

Lyse: We’re all the same to them, aren’t we? Savages to be ruled or slaughtered.

Tansui: They’ve always balked at paying the Ruby Tithe.But they were never so eager to pick a fight…

Tansui: The problem, you see, is that many of my comrades in the Confederacy are of Doman descent─and the acting viceroy…well, she’s none too fond of Domans, to say the least.

Tansui: If we take any action to hinder the safe passage of an imperial vessel, she’ll accuse us of attempting to foment rebellion and brand us enemies of the Empire─which we can ill afford to be. Like the man said, we’re all talk.

Alisaie: And where do the Kojin stand in all this?

Tansui: With the winning side, of course. They are mercenaries to a fault, eager to offer their services without coercion.

Tansui: The shellback could tell you more…though something tells me he would rather not.

Lyse: I don’t understand. If the Garleans are causing the Confederacy this much trouble─and if so many of you are Doman to begin with─why aren’t you willing to fight back?

 Tansui: Hahaha! Spoken like a true friend of the Doman Liberation Front.

Tansui: If you’re planning to rouse us with noble words and grand promises─don’t bother. We all know what the imperial army can do. Compared to them, we’re boys with boats.

Tansui: Besides, what ties a man may once have held to his home are forsaken upon joining the Confederacy. We look out for none but our own.

[Lyse looks ready to punch someone. Alisaie calms her down.]

Tansui: Be that as it may, our livelihood is under threat, and the captain will need to decide soon whether we are to go down in a blaze of glory or bow and scrape for crumbs from the Emperor’s table.

Tansui: …All while our friend the viceroy continues her purge of Doma’s “radical elements.” I believe she’s holding court in one of the fishing villages evenas we speak.

Gosetsu: That she-devil! Her perfidy knows no bounds!

Gosetsu: She must be stopped. Come, let us find Soroban and put to sea at once!

Tansui: Tell the others that these ones have paid. We all have places to be.

[Tensui and the messenger walk off.]

Gosetsu: What are we waiting for? Come, come! Soroban cannot have gone far!

Gosetsu: …Though now that I think on it, it is passing strange that he left without warning. Mayhap he did not wish to be seen by his Kojin brethren?

Gosetsu: I doubt he thought to leave us behind, but nevertheless, it may be prudent to return to his ship. Or at least to the Confederate encampment.

[Soroban is back on the first beach.]

Soroban: Oh, my friends! A thousand pardons! …As you may have guessed, I was reluctant to be seen in your company by my Red brothers. Ours is a…complex relationship.

Soroban: I pray you do not misinterpret their actions as a reflection of our allegiances as a whole.

Soroban: You…you understand? Kami be praised! Too often are shell-less quick to judge all Kojin for the deeds of one.

 Soroban: Right, then. Now that our business with Tansui is concluded, we can traverse the Ruby Sea without fear!

Soroban: I shall return to the ship and prepare for our departure. If you have any remaining business to conduct with the pirates here, I pray you do so now.

Soroban: Ah, that reminds me. Auric, would you be so kind as to inform the Confederates of our plans? The more they know of our movements, the less like we are to be mistaken for another vessel by their comrades.

[Sure, why not?]

Proud Confederate: Oh, you’re one of the ijin from the beach. Leaving us already?

Proud Confederate: No need to pay the tithe, like Tansui said. On the other hand, if you were to peruse our wares and find anything to your liking, we should be glad to sell it to you for a fair price.

[Back to the Ninja Turtle’s boat]

Soroban: You have spoken with the Confederates up above, then? Excellent! If you are ready to depart, we may do so at any time.

[“All Aboard!”]:

[Soroban’s boat arrives at the East Othard coastline]

Soroban: Here we are! I am reasonably certain none bore witness to our approach.

Soroban: And with this, I believe I have fulfilled the terms of our agreement?

Gosetsu: Aye, that you have. You have my deepest thanks, Soroban. Truly, we are blessed to have befriended such a clever and industrious merchant!

Soroban: Oh, you are much too kind, good sir!

Soroban: I know not where your path may lead, but I wish you the very best, and hope that we shall meet again.

[Soroban departs.]

Lyse: So we’ve finally arrived in Othard. All we need to do now is, uh…liberate Doma.

Alisaie: Ah, yes…that.Look…daunting though it is, we do have one thing in our favor:  the element of surprise. Unlike in Gyr Abania, the imperials don’t know we’re here.

Alisaie: Admittedly, that may be our only advantage, considering how few of us there are…

Lyse: Well, I expect the Doman Liberation Front will even up the odds a bit. But before all that, we need to see if this is the fishing village Tansui was talking about.

Gosetsu: It may well be. I smell ceruleum on the breeze…

[The group runs toward the fishing village. On the outskirts, they stop behind a rock outcropping to take stock. There are Imperial soldiers patrolling the village.]

Alisaie: Even accounting for the rebellion, such indiscriminate shows of force seem pointlessly excessive…

 Gosetsu: If only you knew how commonplace such scenes have become. Hmm… Are we too late?

Lyse: Over there─someone’s coming!

[It’s Grynewaht and the Viceroy of Doma, Lady Yotsuyu.]

Gosetsu: …It is she! Sworn enemy of Doma─of my master! The traitor who sold her homeland to the Garleans─Yotsuyu!

Lyse: The viceroy herself. And look─behind her! Isn’t that…?

Yotsuyu: Filth and squalor everywhere I look. How very Doman.What I wouldn’t do for a drink…

 Yotsuyu: Come now, you’ve no reason to look so afraid! You have lived through a quarter of a century of Garlean rule, remember?

 Yotsuyu: ‘Tis better to bend with the wind than stand tall and be broken.Therein lies…hope. Therein lies freedom.

Yotsuyu: I come before you today seeking affirmation. A heartfelt declaration. You are free to answer me as you see fit─yet even the least among you should know the correct response. Should.

[A Kojin of the Red throws a Doman youth on the ground in front of Yotsuyu.]

Yotsuyu: A resident of your village─one of your neighbors, mayhap your friend─was detained by the Kojin this morning. They say he was attempting to flee to Kugane, but we both know that simply isn’t true, don’t we? Have you anything to say?

Yotsuyu: …A bit slow, this one. Is there anyone more sensible among you? Have any of you anything to say? To swear?

[Another Doman man steps forward.]

Isari Youth: M-My lady, I…I swear to serve the Empire! To do…whatever is asked of me…and never disobey…

Yotsuyu: Well said that man. Of course…it wouldn’t do to simply take you at your word.

[Yotsuyu holds out a pistol.]

Yotsuyu: Kill him. Surely you can do that much? He must be guilty of something or other, or he wouldn’t have attempted to flee the Empire.

[The Doman man takes the pistol.]

Isari Youth: I…I have a family… Kami forgive me… Kami forgive me…

[He fires the pistol. The Doman prisoner falls.]

Yotsuyu: Very, very good! I’ve always had a soft spot for men like you.

Yotsuyu: Next, I want you to shoot those two over there. Too old to work, you understand─a burden on the Empire, and we can’t have that.

Isari Youth: But…they’re my parents. You can’t expect me to…

[He turns and points the pistol at the Viceroy. The Imperial guards gun him down.]

 [“…We will show them no mercy.”]

Alisaie: Stop and think for a moment! If you go charging in now, every one of those villagers is as good as dead!

Alisaie: We must consider the wider picture. If we act recklessly, we risk alerting the Garleans to our presence here, making it that much harder for us to work with the local rebels─to say nothing of the reprisals ordinary civilians would be made to suffer.

Gosetsu: Open your eyes, girl─they are already suffering! Let me go─I am putting an end to this madness!

Gosetsu: I will approach the village alone and identify myself. As a former leader of the rebellion and a known fugitive, they will wish to detain me until they are certain they have learned all I know. Use this time to make your plans!

Lyse: You saw what those monsters did to the villagers! Who knows what they’ll do to you─assuming they don’t kill you where you stand!

Gosetsu: We live and die at the pleasure of the kami. My fate is in their hands, and no other’s. If it be of any comfort, I am no stranger to chains.

Lyse: You can’t expect us to stand idly by as a comrade goes marching off to his death! And this is nothing like Kugane!

Alisaie: …Nor is it like the Reach, Lyse─or the Wall. Let him go.

 Alisaie: Hold out for as long as you can, but remember: noble sacrifices are to remain an absolute last resort. I wish I could say it won’t come to that, but only the gods know how we’re going to get you and the others out in one piece. A miracle, perchance…

Gosetsu: A great tower stands to the north and east. Look to its occupants for aid and succor. Together, you may yet find your miracle.

Gosetsu: Now, leave this place. I must go.

[Gosetsun runs up the beach toward the village.]

[Yotsuyu picks up the pistol and points it at the dead man’s elderly parents.]

Yotsuyu: Tsk tsk… Another idiot like all the rest. I’m beginning to think it may be something fundamental, something intrinsic, something quintessentially Doman to ignore the simple truth:  you can’t do a damn thing if you’re dead.

[She starts to pull the trigger.]

Gosetsu: Enough, Yotsuyu!

[Yotsuyu looks up.]

Yotsuyu: Well now…this is a surprise.

Gosetsu: Hear me, Yotsuyu:  cease this farce, here and now, and I shall surrender myself to you. Refuse, and all shall answer to my blade.

[Yotsuyu smiles and lowers the pistol.]

Yotsuyu: …Bring him to the tavern.

 [Back on the beach]

Alisaie: I hate it as much as you. Maybe even more. Every fiber of my being was crying out to intervene, but…

Alisaie: But what’s done is done. Gosetsu’s gamble has gifted us the time we need to find a solution.

Alisaie: He bade us seek aid at the distant tower, yes? For want of a better idea, I say we do just that─while taking care to avoid the imperials.

[A quick swim across the bay to another beach.]

Alisaie: We seem to have evaded their patrols so far…

Lyse: What is that tower, anyway? I’ve never seen anything like it.

Alisaie: According to my map, we are on Onokoro, and the tower is known as Heaven-on-High. A mysterious structure built long ago by persons unknown…

Alisaie: Oh gods, listen to me. I’m starting to sound like Alphinaud. Next thing you know, I’ll be saying things like, “As you are doubtless already aware…”

Alisaie: Hm? Over there! Do you see it?

[There’s a dead walrus-thing full of arrows on the beach.]

Lyse: Hmm… Doesn’t look like it’s been dead long.

Lyse: Whoever did this, they’re a good shot. I can’t see a single stray arrow.

[A strange grunting sound is heard.]

Lyse: Well, someone’s hungry! Wait…that wasn’t either of you two, was it.

[Nope. Three of the ugly walrus-things, these ones alive, are coming up the beach at us.]

Alisaie: Calm down! We had nothing to do wi─Wait, what am I doing? They can’t possibly understand us.

Lyse: Probably not, no…

Alisaie: Time to run, Lyse! We save our strength for any that give chase! You too, Auric!

[FIGHT! With ugly walrus-things! Then we move on down the beach.]

Lyse: Just imagine if they’d taken us by surprise. What a fine ending that would have been to our story…

Lyse: Anyway, I think it’s safe to assume that the people at the tower know how to defend themselves. You’d have to, sharing an island with these things. Now all we need to do is convince them to help us!

[At the village of Onokoro]

Lyse: Ohh…there’s a settlement here! And they’ve even got their own aetheryte.

Lyse: Wait a minute… I’ve seen that standard before. It was when we met with Tansui. Which means this place belongs to… Oh.

Alisaie: It would seem we have found a Confederate settlement─mayhap even their headquarters, judging by the size of the place.

Alisaie: So Gosetsu bade us seek out the Confederacy for aid and succor. The selfsame Confederacy that refuses to openly oppose the Empire.

Alisaie: …Well, nothing ventured, nothing gained, I suppose… At the very least, they’re unlikely to ask us for the tithe.

[Look who’s here. It’s Tansui.]

Tansui: What wind brings you hither, of all places? Were you not bound for Othard’s shores?

Tansui: …I see. I trust you have not forgotten our previous conversation on the subject? No? Then what do you want, a second opinion? Very well.

Tansui: Come with me. I will take you to the captain─Rasho.

Alisaie: …Just like that? An audience with their leader? How very accommodating. We must needs choose our words carefully.

Lyse: You leave it to me! I’ve always been good with people. And this will also give me a chance to use the eastern greeting they showed me in Revenant’s Toll!

[Up the stairs to meet Captain Rasho. He’s a Roe in a blue kimono.]

Lyse: Greetings! Y-You must be Rasho, leader of the Confederacy and…so on… I realize this is all a bit sudden, but…the thing is…we have a little favor to ask…

Lyse: …Oh gods, I’ve probably broken half a dozen rules of Far Eastern etiquette already… Well, I’m sorry about that, but you have to understand that we’re in a hurry, so…I’m going to stop talking now.

 Rasho: …Men who revere manners and tradition can be found the world over. But not here.

Rasho: Your candor is appreciated. Speak your heart.

[The Warrior of Light explains the situation.]

Rasho: …Gosetsu. A former leader of the rebellion. Aye, I know of him.

Rasho: Why he bade you petition us for aid and succor, however, I know not.

Tansui: At the risk of repeating myself, to join the Confederacy is to renounce all other ties. We are beholden to none─allied with none.

Tansui: When Doma was invaded by the Empire twenty-five years ago, we did not rush to her defense. Knowing this, do you honestly expect us to help you drive the imperial forces out of Isari?

Tansui: The Garleans have long maintained a presence in this region, and we would be fools to break the peace, fragile as it is. Besides, you are capable warriors, yes? With guile and preparation, you can surely resolve this matter yourselves.

Alisaie: It is imperative that our presence here remain secret for as long as possible. For us to openly engage the imperials at this time would endanger everything we have come here to achieve!

Rasho: You have told us why you cannot fight. Not why we should fight in your stead.

Rasho: If you would speak to me of lives saved, I would speak to you of slaughter. How many will die when all pretense is lost and the Garleans declare war on the Confederacy?

Rasho: …Hate is a luxury we cannot afford.You are free to come and go as you please, but you will receive no further aid.

Alisaie: Thank you for your hospitality. If you would excuse us.

Lyse: Hey, Auric… I know that didn’t go well, but I’m not prepared to give up on them yet.

Lyse: Gosetsu told us to come here for a reason. He must have believed we could convince them to help us… We just have to work out how.

Alisaie: My thoughts exactly. I’m glad to hear we’re of the same mind.

Alisaie: ‘Tis little wonder they refused─we have done naught to persuade them. The real work begins now.

Alisaie: We need to learn more about the Confederacy─what their needs and weaknesses are. Once we know that, we will know how to earn their trust.

 [The arms and armor have been piled up haphazardly. They display no signs of recent use or maintenance…]

[A number of crates and barrels have been stored here. On closer inspection, however, most are empty…]

Nawashiro: Hm? Taken an interest in the ship? Heh, good eye! She’s not much to look at now, but once upon a time, she was a beauty!

Nawashiro: The Confederacy favors flotillas of smaller ships to capture and board errant vessels. The larger ones, like this sekibune, only take part in major engagements.

Nawashiro: …Not that we’ve had any of those recently, what with those imperial bastards throwing their weight around. If it wasn’t for them… Well, no use moaning about what you can’t change, eh?

Alisaie: Had a good look around? Then we just need to wait for Lyse.

Lyse: Sorry to keep you waiting, but I wanted to talk to as many people as I could…

Lyse: It’s just as Tansui said. They have no intention of standing up to Yotsuyu.

Lyse: I don’t know if you two got a different impression…

[“Under the right circumstances, they might help us.”]

Alisaie: I agree. It’s obvious that they are struggling to survive, and that they blame the imperials for their recent troubles.

Alisaie: Even if we do nothing, it is inevitable that they will come into conflict with the Empire sooner or later─and deep down, they all know it.

Alisaie: The only thing holding them back at the moment is the belief that they lack the strength to survive the coming war.

Lyse: So we need to prove to them that we’re not all talk─that we can be valuable allies in the fight!

 Alisaie: And what better way to demonstrate our worth than by…seeking out people with mundane problems and offering them our expert assistance?

Lyse: Wouldn’t be the first time we’ve had to earn someone’s trust by helping them out with this and that. And you know it won’t be the last.

Lyse: I’ll look around the western end of Onokoro. You two take the east. Good luck!

[Looking for people to help on the east side of the village.]

Afumi: Kami take me! What kind of pirate cannot suffer the sway of the ocean!?

Afumi: Hm? A new recruit from far-flung shores? Listen well─I have a task for you.

Afumi: Go first to Aokumo below and receive of him medicine for men of the earth.

Afumi: Then to Quickscape Pier and the hapless Doman bemoaning his wretched fate. Quickly!

Aokumo: Come at the behest of Afumi for medicine? My very best is yours for the taking.

 Aokumo: How pitiful the lot of this Doman unable to stomach the sea. A true Confederate could raid a dozen ships while in his cups. Mayhap this one should return whence he came.

Seasick Doman Recruit: Uuugh… Why does it shift and shudder still…

Seasick Doman Recruit: Medicines!? Give them here! They may look down on me for resorting to such measures, but I would do aught to render the world stable and motionless once more.

Seasick Doman Recruit: You are kind, as is Afumi. You may tell her that I will return to my duties as soon as I am able.

Afumi: …The Doman was raised in the mountains of his homeland. The first time he saw the sea was after he fled his homeland and came to us.

Afumi: He tosses and turns in his sleep, and when he takes to the water, it is not long before he can no longer stand.

Afumi: But he will grow accustomed to this life. He is hardly the first, after all. The captain too was once of Doma, though he cast all aside twenty and five years ago, when the imperials took his lands and the lives of his parents and brothers.

 Afumi: Perhaps you too will renounce your ties and join us someday? Aye, I mistook you for a recruit before, but I know your tale now. Tansui unfolded all.

Afumi: Think on my offer, Westerner. You may find small joys in the land, but the sea holds salvation.

 

Kajika: You strike me as a strong and capable individual. I’ve a job for you, Westerner, if you are courageous as well.

Kajika: On the beach far to the west lies the carcass of a gyuki, feathered with arrows. I would have you go and retrieve those which may still be of use.

Kajika: While you are about it, I should be glad if you were to butcher its tail for meat. Very good meat in gyuki tails, you know.

Kajika: But I did say you would need be a courageous sort, and I meant it. The beast was young. Do not be surprised if an angry mother mourns its child.

Kajika: You have been away for some time─perhaps in search of a young gyuki corpse?

Kajika: I see I did not misjudge you! Thank you for your help. Would that I could have tended to my own kill, but such is life…

Kajika: A pity the meat is not as delicious as it is nutritious. Under normal circumstances, we would not bother hunting gyuki as game, but as you may have heard, these are not normal circumstances.

Kajika: Arrows too must be reused when possible. A prudent measure become necessary, alas. With every passing day our future grows more uncertain…

Kajika: But this day we shall have full bellies, and in that must we take solace. And wayward travelers need not risk the ire of vengeful gyuki by wandering near my neglected kill.

Kajika: A strange sigh passes your lips. Have I said something odd? No matter─ Thank you again for your aid!

 

Aranami: You there─aye, you. Have you seen a bumbling clod of an Au Ra? A new recruit I ordered to patrol the northern edge of Onokoro. He is late in returning.

Aranami: A strange boy he was, quiet and brooding. Reluctant to speak unless spoken to first. Better that than a fool who never holds his tongue, perhaps.

Aranami: Much as I would enjoy dragging him back by the ear, I cannot. Duty compels me to remain. You, on the other hand, have no such obligations…

Confederate Recruit: Who…who are you? You do not look like a man of the Confederacy.

Confederate Recruit: …Forgive me. ‘Twas but yesterday we bid farewell to one of our own, and I worried that she might have lost her way.

Confederate Recruit: We laid her to rest in a boat and pushed her out till the current claimed it. For the sea is our home, now and ever after.

Confederate Recruit: But those sent thither with burdened hearts may drift back to shore, it is said…

Confederate Recruit: Out of concern for her comrades, she strove to earn far more than her keep. She hunted rare and deadly game in treacherous waters, and lost her life for it.

 Confederate Recruit: But my vigil is ended─her vessel has not returned to Onokoro! She has made peace with this life and placed her faith in us to live on…

Aranami: So, what of my recruit? Did you find him napping on the beach or some such?

Aranami: What? All this time he was standing watch for the funerary vessel? Huh…

Aranami: So rarely does he give voice to his thoughts. I had no idea our comrade’s death had affected him so. Too quick was I to judge him.

Aranami: It is good that you went in my stead, else I might have misspoken and made a fool of myself. Please accept this as a token of my gratitude.

 

Hirase: You’ve been busy, haven’t you? And now you’re here to ask if I need help with anything? Heh, now that you mention it…

Hirase: Lately we’ve had trouble with ravenous sharks that’ve been leaping out of the water and making off with our fish. Damnedest thing, I know, but you wouldn’t doubt it if you saw it.

Hirase: We’ve got to cull the thieving bastards regularly─so happens I sent three of my mates out there before you came along. Still, the more the merrier. If you can kill four or so, that ought to be enough.

Hirase: Take a few of those rotting fish as bait. I’ll not be needing them. Oh, and maybe see if you can’t find the other group. They’ve been away longer than I like.

 

Industrious Pirate: Oh, kami be praised! I don’t know what I would’ve done if you hadn’t come along.

Industrious Pirate: My partners and I got separated when we fled. You haven’t seen them, have you?

Industrious Pirate: Damn… Before the Kojin started chasing us, their leader asked us if we were Doman…

Industrious Pirate: They’re Yotsuyu’s catchers, I know it! First Isari, and now this! I’ve got to tell Rasho and the others!

 

Alisaie: Ah, there you are, Auric. I heard you went shark hunting?

Alisaie: We too did our fair share of beast culling─though I think Lyse made a stronger impression when she bested a drunken pirate in a sparring match. Fastest knockout to date, I am told.

Alisaie: I should like to think we have proven ourselves to be rather─ Hm. Why do I get the feeling you have something important to tell me?

Alisaie: Kojin mercenaries rounding up Doman Confederates? Surely Yotsuyu has crossed the line now…

Alisaie: We must go and speak with Rasho immediately. Even he cannot deny that this changes everything.

Alisaie: At least, I should like to think that he cannot…

Tansui: Our most compassionate acquaintances return. For your deeds, we owe you many thanks.

Tansui: …But something tells me our thanks are not sufficient. The strange thing is, I was certain you understood our position. And yet here you are with that same look in your eyes─and those same words upon your lips, I’ll wager.

Alisaie: I speak only the truth. The Confederacy will not be spared Yotsuyu’s wrath. You have always known this─that one day you would have no choice but to stand up to the Empire. I say to you that day is today, and come once more to ask that you join us in the fight.

Tansui: How convenient that recent events should lend such credence to your claims. Tell me, do death and destruction always follow in your wake?

Rasho: They had no part in it, Tansui. You know this. We all know this.

Rasho: They came and took our Doman brothers. They will torture them for her sport─murder them for her satisfaction.

Rasho: So we attack, and get butchered for our trouble…or do naught, and let them have their pound of flesh.

Rasho: If this be our choice, I say we suffer the ignominy. We endure. We survive. There is no better path.

Rasho: Until the day our enemy is grown weaker, and we stronger, there can be no retribution. We will wait for a sign. Such is the judgment of the Confederacy.

Lyse: So that’s it, then. You’re just going to abandon them. To her.

Lyse: They’d die for you, you know─for the Confederacy. They would die for you, but you wouldn’t even think to risk your lives for theirs!

[Rasho and Tensui clench their fists.]

Alisaie: I have one last idea, if you will allow. I’m afraid it’s not very good as ideas go─it’s exceedingly reckless, in fact, and you may well come to despise me for ever having suggested it. Assuming we survive, that is.

Alisaie: The question being: do you trust me?

[“Do you even need to ask?”]

Lyse: We can’t stand by and let innocent people suffer─here or anywhere else. I’ll do whatever it takes.

Alisaie: Then let us roll the dice.

[Alisaie steps forward to address Captain Rasho.]

Alisaie: If it’s a sign you want, we shall give you one. One rousing enough to make you drive every Garlean out of Isari without a second thought.

Alisaie: You are wary of invoking the ire of the imperial forces stationed in Doma, correct?

Alisaie: Know then that once we have rescued our comrade and freed Isari, we mean to liberate the nation as a whole.

Alisaie: You will doubtless require assurances that we are capable of achieving this─and that is only fair. Accordingly, we shall demonstrate our seriousness by depriving the Garleans of a key ally:  the Kojin.

Tansui: What, the three of you? Just like that?

[The Warrior of Light steps forward.]

Alisaie: Actually, my esteemed colleague here will attend to it on his own. But the how of it is not your concern─only the outcome.

Alisaie: If we succeed, you help us liberate Isari. If we fail, you lose nothing. A simple enough wager─if you have the stones for it.

Tansui: The little miss does make it hard to refuse, does she not?

Rasho: Words are air. We will weigh you by your deeds.

 

Rasho: So. Alone you will deal with the Kojin.

Rasho: If you are set upon this course, I shall give to you a word of advice.

Rasho: Two factions have the Kojin. The mercenaries who serve the Empire belong to the Red.

Rasho: Those who belong to the Blue are the traders. They have made no pact with the imperials, and so may be willing to aid your cause.

Rasho: Seek the Blue on the Isle of Bekko. There you will find a cave. The rest is up to you.

Alisaie: Thank you, Captain. We shall endeavor not to keep you waiting overlong for your sign.

Alisaie: Right, then. Let us head for─ Wait, where is Lyse? We cannot leave without her.

[She’s down at the docks.]:

Lyse: Hm? Auric? What is it?

Lyse: Oh, sorry. I didn’t mean to wander off. I…I just wanted to have a think.

Alisaie: You’re worried we won’t be able to live up to our promises?

Lyse: No, it’s not that at all! If anything, I’m frustrated that I didn’t think of it first…

Lyse: Yda and my father had a way with words. They knew how to inspire people─how to bring them together. I always hoped I might have something of that in me too, but I’m starting to think I don’t.

Lyse: What am I even doing here…?

Alisaie: …Lyse, you─

Lyse: Gods, listen to me! I don’t know where that came from. Forget I said anything!

Lyse: We have places to go, imperials to fight, and friends to save! And we’re not going to get any of it done by standing around here moaning, right?

Lyse: …Right?

Alisaie: …Before we first traveled to Gyr Abania, I was in Limsa Lominsa, visiting…visiting a friend. A young child who had been through a great deal.

Alisaie: …That’s neither here nor there, I suppose. Anyway, on the way back, I passed a patisserie which sold some of the most exquisite-looking tarts I had ever seen. I’ve always preferred cookies, to be honest, but nevertheless I decided to stop and try one…

Alisaie: …I’ll treat you to one, when all this is over. Auric too─and I won’t take no for an answer.

Lyse: What about Y’shtola? We’d never hear the end of it!

Alisaie: All right, all right─Y’shtola too, once she’s better. Deal? Good. Then let’s hurry, shall we? We have a million things to do before then!

 [A refreshing swim out to Bekko Island]

Alisaie: I think this is the Isle of Bekko─though, to be honest, it looks the same to me as however many other islands around here…

Alisaie: Rasho said there was a cave that would lead us to their village. We should search further inland.

 [Hey there’s a cave.]

Alisaie: Is that light I see up ahead?

Alisaie: We, uh…appear to be standing inside a giant bubble. By the Twelve…I think we’re on the seabed!

Soroban: Well, well! I thought I heard familiar voices.

Lyse: Soroban? What are you doing here?

Soroban: Hmm? What a curious question. I live here.

Lyse: Then this is the home of the Blue Kojin?

Soroban: Just so. I bid you welcome to Tamamizu!

Alisaie: How fortunate that we should find a familiar face in this place…

Alisaie: We should tell Soroban about our situation. If anyone here can help us, it’s him!

Soroban: So tell me, my friends─what strange tides bear you to our home?

Soroban: That is indeed a most dire predicament…but perhaps an opportunity for us to craft yet another profitable arrangement!

Soroban: Very well. I shall introduce you to our leader, Bunchin. It will be up to you, however, to present your case.

Bunchin: Welcome, guests. Gratitude to you for aiding Soroban in his negotiations.

Alisaie: We thank you for your hospitality, honored elder. Pray forgive me my brevity, but I wish to discuss an urgent matter…

Bunchin: So…you seek to compel our Red brothers to forego hostilities for a time.

Lyse: That’s right. We know your two clans have your…differences, but what with you being…brothers and all, we thought you might be able to share some…secret knowledge…or something?

Bunchin: From far above, you have journeyed here in search of our wisdom. You shall have it.

Bunchin: All creation is a tapestry, through which the divine is interwoven. Kami are legion, and they can be found in the great and the small.

Bunchin: Though they come and go as they please, they favor certain vessels. The ancient. The precious. The exquisite.

Bunchin: We Kojin covet these vessels, these treasures. We go forth and bring them home, to keep them safe and bask in their divinity. They bring prosperity and joy to us and our children.

Bunchin: Yet how were we to seek these treasures above if we made enemies of the Garlean Empire, powerful and far-reaching as they are?

Bunchin: Wiser to join with them. So resolved the Red Kojin.

Soroban: Cautiously and carefully, for the Garleans are blind to the divine. Nor will they suffer their subjects to see.

Soroban: So the Red masquerade as mercenaries who seek money and power and never speak of their faith in the presence of their masters.

Soroban: To honor the divine, they deny it. A twisted and misguided path.

Bunchin: Aye, aye. Kami will not abide such foolishness, this they shall learn to their sorrow.

Bunchin: While our Red brothers live by the sword, we Blue Kojin uphold the old ways, engaging in trade and valuing peace.

Bunchin: Alas, men distinguish not between our clans, and judgment for the doings of the Red falls unjustly upon the Blue. Thus do men grow more and more reluctant to deal with us, denying us our treasures. This cannot continue!

Alisaie: On that point we are in agreement. You are willing to aid our cause, then?

Bunchin: There is a way that the Red may be driven to retreat into their shells.

Bunchin: But to share with you this knowledge is to reveal secrets of the divine. Assurances must first be had. Trust forged. A bargain struck.

Soroban: Well said, Elder! In great crises is great profit to be had!

Bunchin: Delight not overmuch in such things, Soroban.Now, tell our guests what must be done.

Soroban: As you wish!

Lyse: Well, I’ve no idea what we’ve gotten ourselves into, but so far, so good, right?

Soroban: Listen well, my friends. We require your assistance with the search for a priceless treasure:  the Yasakani-no-Magatama.

Soroban: This jewel, this most sacred of Kojin relics, was in the possession of Hingashi─until they decided to present it to the Garleans in a gesture of conciliation.

Soroban: The Red would not abide this, and so they plotted to seize the vessel bearing it to their imperial masters. Alas, though they succeeded, in the ensuing chaos the Magatama was lost to the sea.

Soroban: We wish to recover the sacred jewel before our brothers. However, were we to come into conflict with them, it would be…problematic. Therefore, we turn to you.

Lyse: So you want us to search the ocean floor for this treasure of yours? I’m not sure how we’re supposed to do that without, you know…

Soroban: Drowning? Fear not. There is a ritual I can perform to imbue your bodies with a powerful blessing. But first, you must prepare offerings for the sea.

Soroban: I require twisted ruby coral, several fist-sized sea snail shells, and a freshly harvested unkiu carapace.

Alisaie: That’s quite the shopping list. I will see to the shells, and Lyse can look for the coral. Auric, would you go and find an unkiu and relieve it of its carapace?

[One turtle-shucking coming up!]

Soroban: Well? Have you the unkiu carapace?

Soroban: How splendid they are! The kami shall be most pleased, I am sure.

Lyse: I got it! I got the ruby coral you wanted!

Alisaie: And I the sea snail shells. They’re about the size of my fist, though I realize now you may have meant yours…

Soroban: These shall more than suffice for our purpose. Next, we must make ready to present them to the sea and perform the ritual.

Soroban: Once it has been completed, you will be able to move freely through the depths and find the Yasakani-no-Magatama!

Alisaie: …Out of curiosity, how large is this sacred jewel of yours? Unless it’s far too large to be carried by the three of us, how are we supposed to even find it? The Ruby Sea is not exactly small.

Soroban: Hah hah hah! Surely you realize we have been searching this whole time? The area we wish you to explore is but a small fraction of the Ruby Sea.

Soroban: Already have we scoured most of the seabed near and within our territory, to no avail. All that remains is a region to the west.

Soroban: The shell-less of Sui-no-Sato can provide you with better guidance than we. You would do well to visit them first.

Lyse: Shell-less? You mean the Kojin aren’t the only ones living under the sea?

Soroban: Of course not! The Raen have been here as long as I can remember. Shiosai, the…overseer, I believe, can tell you more when you arrive.

Soroban: But we are getting ahead of ourselves. We have yet to carry out the ritual!

Lyse: I can hardly wait!

Soroban: Are you ready, my friends, to explore a world unlike any you have ever known?

Soroban: Then let us go to western part of the village, where the water twists and turns, and there complete our preparations for the ritual.

Alisaie: He dived into the water a moment ago and said to wait here until he returned…

Soroban: It is done. Your offerings have been given to the sea.

Soroban: The ritual can begin at last. Come and stand before me, my friends.

Soroban: Yes, yes. Listen to my words, and let all else wash away. Listen to my words, and feel them flow into your heart…at first a trickle, then a flood…

Soroban: O kami of the fathomless waters,

Of the fallen, the ascended, the flowing, and the becalmed,

Caretakers of the shallows and of the depths…

Soroban: Receive of us our meager offerings, Cleanse these ones of earth and stone, and grant them your blessing,That they might drink deep of the divine…

Soroban: The ritual is complete, my friends.You may now breathe in the depths as you would upon land.

Alisaie: Strange. I don’t feel any different. Are you sure it worked?

Soroban: …Reasonably. The blessing does have its limits, of course. While it will allow you to dwell in the depths, it will not help you traverse them.

Lyse: I can swim well enough. How about you, Alisaie?

Alisaie: Oh, like a fish. In contrast to my doggy-paddling brother.

Alisaie: Somehow, the boy just isn’t very buoyant.

Soroban: Hmm…skilled or no, your bodies are ill-suited to the sea. Your cause demands alacrity, and you shall have it.

Soroban: But first, let us take to the water.

[Alisaie dives through the wall of the bubble into the open sea]

Alisaie: Incredible… I could swear I was breathing air!

Soroban: Now, I shall summon for you noble steeds of great strength.

[Soroban summons three large manta rays]

Lyse: Wow, look at them! I bet they could take us all the way to the deepest depths of the sea!

Alisaie: And so they may─after we’ve won over the Confederacy, rescued Gosetsu, and liberated your respective homelands.

Soroban: Should you become parted from your steeds, return to me, and I shall call them again. Take care, my friends, and may the kami speed you on your way.

Lyse: We’ll find that treasure in no time! Come on!

[Diving Unlocked]

[Owing to Soroban’s blessing, you may now dive into deep water and stay submerged indefinitely.]

Lyse: This must be Sui-no-Sato, the Raen village Soroban told us about.

Lyse: Right, then! Let’s see if they can’t help us find the Kojin’s missing jewel!

Lyse: So…this is our man?

Shiosai: …Leave this place and never return. We have no need of wide-eyed wanderers.

Lyse: Sorry, I didn’t mean to stare. My name is Lyse, and these are my friends, Auric and Alisaie.

Lyse: We’re looking for the overseer of Sui-no-Sato, Shiosai. That’s you, isn’t it?

Shiosai: …The Kojin of the Blue sent you hither, did they?

Shiosai: I am no overseer, nor ever would I claim to be one. I am high priest of Shisui of the Violet Tides. Shiosai.

Lyse: So you are the man we’re looking for! Great! We need your help. We’re looking for this jewel called the Yasakani-no─

Shiosai: Stop. I will hear no more.

Shiosai: We will suffer no outside troubles in our sanctuary. Especially those of would-be treasure hunters.

Isobe: <chirp> <chirp>

Shiosai: Quiet, Isobe, or there will be no dango for dinner.

Shiosai: Ahem. I can do naught to aid you. I say to you again, leave this place and never return.

Alisaie: …At the very least, sir, you might condescend to tell us of your village, and of why you are so loath to show us even the most basic courtesy.

Shiosai: …Sui-no-Sato is our sanctuary. Under the benevolent leadership of the Ruby Princess, sovereign of Shisui, we Raen enjoy humble yet fulfilling lives. But it was not always so.

Shiosai: Long ago, our forebears were driven from their ancestral lands. Beneath the waters, they sought refuge from the ravages of war, and here they flourished. All that we are─our culture, our traditions─was born of the sea. As was I.

Shiosai: Though we have engaged others in diplomacy, it has ever been with the utmost caution. Isolation and independence are essential to preserving our way of life.

Shiosai: So it was when Doma fell twenty-five years past. The Ruby Princess, in her wisdom, decreed that we would take no part. As it was, so ever shall it be.

Alisaie: Forever and ever apart…Forgive me. I understand now how highly you value your way of life, and how you will suffer none to endanger it.

Alisaie: You may be assured that we have no desire to do so. And I would hope that we have given you no cause to assume otherwise.

Shiosai: …You have not. But this changes nothing.

Shiosai: Regardless of your intentions, it is not my place to break with tradition.

Shiosai: I must consider the wishes of all who call Sui-no-Sato home. For me to defy their will and permit outsiders to remain would be a gross betrayal of my responsibilities. Please do not ask this of me.

Alisaie: …Thank you for your time, sir.

Alisaie: And so it continues. Another village, another deaf ear.

Alisaie: Clearly, Gyr Abania is not the only place with walls.

Alisaie: I’m starting to wonder if this was all a huge mistake. Gosetsu couldn’t have known we would take this long. I only hope he’s still alive…

 [Meanwhile in the tavern in Isari]

[Grynewaht is beating a bound Gosetsu]

Yotsuyu: I tire of this filthy tavern and its still filthier clientele.

Gosetsu: ‘Tis scant reward for your treachery, aye. A painted woman of your rich experience deserves a better class of customer.

Yotsuyu: Name-calling? Is that what we’ve been reduced to?

Gosetsu: Orphan of the Naeuri, widow of Sashihai─what joy it must have brought you to be revenged upon us all.

Yotsuyu: Not enough. Not nearly enough.

Yotsuyu: My appetite for your agony is as an abyss─bottomless. Insatiable.

Yotsuyu: Before you die, you will cry and beg and prostrate yourself upon the earth. You will crawl on your belly through the muck and the piss, and debase yourself for my amusement. All of you.

Yotsuyu: But you think you are made of sterner stuff. Hm. Rather than have him beat you, mayhap I should have my oaf go and fetch your master’s head…?

Yotsuyu: Poor, poor Lord Kaien─kami rest his soul! Noble leader of a fallen nation…A fine puppet he made for the viceroy─for a time.

Yotsuyu: Twenty-five years he was content to serve his masters as a dog. And then everyone had to rise up and get themselves killed.

Yotsuyu: Tell me, how did it feel to fail him that day?To live with the disgrace of his death.

Yotsuyu: Not that you were a stranger to living with disgrace, of course. In the, what was it, twenty-five years since you were humiliated and tossed into an imperial gaol, you had plenty of time to get used to it.

Yotsuyu: Oh yes, I heard the stories. About the samurai who would do anything to return to his master’s side─even if it meant pledging his blade to his sworn enemy. They say he walked with death─that he slew a thousand men in the Empire’s name. Truly a tale for the poets.

Gosetsu: I do not deny my sins. But I will not be reproached by the likes of you.

Yotsuyu: Oh, I mean not to reproach you, but to praise you! You’re a survivor, samurai. Just…like…me.

Yotsuyu: So let us not dwell on the past, you and I, and instead give thought to the future. To wit, I would ask you again to help me resolve this vexing matter of Doma’s missing heir.

Yotsuyu: Living or dead, it makes no difference really─but the Garleans are most insistent that we put this problem behind us, and I know you helped him flee. So, tell me:  what became of Lord Hien?

Gosetsu: To my dismay, the details escape me at present.Mayhap your dog could jog my memory?

Yotsuyu: Get on with it! And mark me, brute:  there is no limit to how far you can fall.

Grynewaht: Of all the bloody… <mumble> <mumble> When I get back to Eorzea, I’m going to find that little shite and I’m gonna make him pay…

[Back in Sui-no-sato]

Alisaie: We seem to have reached an impasse. And to make matters worse, every solution I can think of will only take more time…

Alisaie: I don’t suppose you have any ideas, do you, Auric?

[“We could ask the villagers if they know anything.”]

Alisaie: Right…

???: You are the ones who came from above, yes? If we could have a moment of your time?

Ihanami: Mine apologies. I did not mean to startle you. My name is Ihanami, and this is my wife Yunagi.

Ihanami: We were wondering… Have you any news from Doma? If so, we should like very much to hear it.

Alisaie: May I ask why?

Ihanami: …If you must. Our daughter fought in the rebellion. We have heard naught from her since.

Ihanami: ‘Twould be too much to hope that you know of her, but…her name is Yugiri.

Yunagi: Kami be praised! She lives! She lives…

Lyse: We’re looking for her too, actually, but I’m sure she’s all right.

Alisaie: We had no idea she hailed from Sui-no-Sato. How did she come to serve Doma as a shinobi?

Ihanami: It all began when she was a little girl. She and another child crept out of the village, having grown curious about the outside world. To Doma they went, where they met a young boy─a proud son of Yanxia.

Ihanami: His tales of imperial oppression left a lasting impression on her. When she returned, she spoke passionately of the Domans’ plight and urged us to take the boy in. But my wife and I would not hear of it.

Ihanami: We thought the matter closed, but she never forgot his words. She became convinced that the Garleans would one day come for us. And it was in search of the strength to defend us that she left, years later, to learn the ways of the shinobi…

Ihanami: When the then Ruby Princess learned of this, she forbade Yugiri’s return, lest she bring misfortune to us all.

Yunagi: We protested the judgment, but there was naught we could do. And so our daughter, who wanted only to keep her people safe…

Yunagi: Surely there is something we can do for these people? They who gave her aid and succor when no other would?

Ihanami: …I am but a humble stonemason. But if it is the Yasakani-no-Magatama you seek, I may yet be of some assistance to you.

Ihanami: The jewel is known to possess an unusual property. To the naked eye it is as jade, but when bathed in a particular light, it shimmers with a divine resplendence.

Ihanami: I have mined similar materials before. To find them, one must use these lamps.

Ihanami: They cast an invisible light, under which the stones sparkle. In the deepest depths, they are invaluable.

Ihanami: There is a sunken ship to the east. Though the currents may have spirited away her cargo, you should begin your search there.

Alisaie: Thank you so much. We will do just that!

Yunagi: I hope you find that which you seek. I only wish there were something more we could do to assist you… Know that you will be in my prayers.

Yunagi: And…when next you see our daughter, pray tell her not a day goes by that her parents and her brothers do not think of her.

Lyse: We will. I promise!

[Searching underwater.]

Alisaie: If this wreck is the selfsame vessel of which Soroban spoke, then if the gods are good, the Magatama is nearby…

Alisaie: Ready your lamp and keep your eyes open, Auric. We’re going to need to take this slowly. Move too fast and we risk overlooking something.

[To find the Yasakani-no-Magatama, you will need to search the area marked on your map.]

[Use your lamp to pinpoint the precise location of the treasure and claim it!]

Alisaie: I swear, looking for a needle in a haystack would be quicker. Gosetsu will have died of old age by the time we finish. You haven’t found anything, have you, Auric?

Alisaie: This…this is it! The Yasakani-no-Magatama, exactly as Soroban described!

Alisaie: Heh, it would seem that our fortunes have finally changed for the better!

Alisaie: Much as I would like to return and thank Yugiri’s parents for their assistance, time is of the essence. I say we make for Tamamizu at once.

Alisaie: Hold on to it for now, Auric. Once we arrive, present it to the elder, and then we can finally learn how to deal with the Red Kojin.

[Back in  Tamamizu]

Bunchin: You are returned, and with the Yasakani-no-Magatama, I trust?

Bunchin: Yes, there is no mistake. Well done, well done.

Lyse: So…about the Red Kojin. You said there was a way to make them retreat into their shells? Are you ready to tell us now?

Bunchin: I did indeed, and yes…I am.

Bunchin: For you see, divinity resides not only in material vessels, but in individuals. In laying claim to this most sacred of treasures, you have demonstrated an affinity with the divine.

Bunchin: To treat with men and women such as you is to invite fortune into our homes. Gladly will we aid your cause.

Bunchin: All is ready, Soroban? Then give them what they require.

Alisaie: This is…a ceremonial knife of some sort?

Bunchin: Before this blade, that which is sealed shall open. The treasure vault of the Kojin, on the Isle of Zekki.

Bunchin: It is there that our most prized relics, be they of the Red or the Blue, are kept safe. Fiercely do the Red guard it, for its contents are more precious than their lives.

Bunchin: Were the vault to be attacked, their response would by necessity be immediate. Kojin would be summoned from malms around to defend their treasures.

Alisaie: …And were we to sow enough chaos, the Reds in service to the imperials would have no choice but to answer the call as well.

Lyse: Giving the Confederacy the sign they’ve been waiting for! Without the Kojin, the imperials don’t have nearly enough troops in Isari to hold off the pirates.

Bunchin: However…you must understand that the vault is holy ground:  home to a thousand thousand kami. To intrude upon it without paying the proper respects is a sacrilege we cannot condone.

Lyse: So…if we were to pay the proper respects, it would be all right? Great! How do we do that, again?

Bunchin: The Yasakani-no-Magatama is one of three most coveted treasures of the Kojin. The other two lie within the vault.

Bunchin: Were you to deliver the jewel unto the others, and thereby make them whole, the kami may forgive your trespass and instead delight in your…mischief-making.

Alisaie: So…if I understand you correctly, you want us to take the sacred jewel coveted by your Red brothers and deliver it to their treasure vault?

Soroban: More or less. The Yasakani-no-Magatama belongs on the Isle of Zekki. So long as it finds its way there, we are satisfied.

Soroban: The Magatama has chosen you to bear it to its brothers. Had it not, you would never have found it. And we would not be having this conversation.

Soroban: I shall inform the Confederacy of your plans, and bid them make ready to act when the time is right.

Bunchin: The Isle of Zekki lies to the west of Sui-no-Sato. Look for a cave beneath the waters.

Bunchin: May fortune favor you in this and all other endeavors.

Alisaie: Right, then. I am not normally in the habit of sneaking into heavily guarded treasure vaults, but if this is the only way to convince the Confederacy to act, then so be it.

Alisaie: We should be prepared for a fight. The bigger the better. The kind where you’ll wish you had seven of your most battle-hardened friends at your side…

Alisaie: I don’t know about you two, but I’m as ready as I’ll ever be.

Lyse: Me too. Let’s do this!

Alisaie: Right. Right. Naught left to say, then…

[“To the Isle of Zekki!”]

Alisaie: R-Right! Let’s go and find that cave!

Alisaie: Assuming this is the right cave, it should lead us straight into the heart of the Isle of Zekki…

Lyse: Have you got a plan for once we get to the isle?

Alisaie: Hmm… How about two of us get the guards’ attention while the third heads straight for the vault?

Alisaie: Afterwards, the other two join them there, and together we make a stand. With our numbers, it’s not feasible to do anything more complicated, I think.

Lyse: Fine by me. I like simple plans. I’ll be one of the decoys, then.

Alisaie: You read my mind. I also had a mind to ask Auric to be one, given his peerless martial prowess.

Alisaie: Then it’s settled. You two will make your way through the stronghold, creating as much chaos as possible. You know, have some fun.

Alisaie: Meanwhile, I will attempt to locate the vault and gain entry with the ceremonial knife. When I am inside, I will contact you via linkpearl.

Lyse: Right! Come on, Auric! We’ve got work to do!

 [Mischief managed]

Lyse: You’re a sight for sore eyes! I hope Alisaie’s all right too…

Alisaie: Auric, Lyse, can you hear me? I’ve found the vault!

Alisaie: Head northwest. There’s a passage leading deeper within. Hurry!

Alisaie: There you are! The entrance is straight ahead.

Alisaie: Good timing, I might add. It sounds like the whole garrison is headed straight for us…

Red Marine Commander: Thieves! Thieves! Come to steal our most precious treasures! You will pay for this sacrilege!

Lyse: That’s the spirit! Now don’t be shy─I’m more than ready for another round!

Red Marine Commander: Seize them!

???: Who…? Who hath made us whole?

Red Marine Commander: Hark! A great kami stirs… Yes, yes, a great kami of the sacred treasures!

Red Marine Commander: O great kami, we beseech your intercession! We who have guarded your blade and glass for generations─your faithful Kojin!

[“If I made you whole, it was not my intent. I but carried the trinket.”]

???: Thou didst freely deliver our jewel unto thine enemy’s own treasure vault?

???: Hah hah hah! How auspicious! We do commend thee, son of man.

???: Such audacity is deserving of celebration, exultation─a contest of wills to mark the occasion! Let lines be drawn! Let sides be chosen! And for their loyalty, we shall stand with the caretakers of our greater part.

Alisaie: Oh, perfect. A contest of wills. Just what we need.

???: Hahahaha hah hah hah! Hearken to us, shelled ones! Upon this day, your wish shall be granted!

???: Curse neither your fate nor its executor, children of man, for we are of the divine─of both heaven and earth. The ringing silence. The raging calm.

???: All riseth and falleth at the whim of capricious fortune. Assume your marks upon the stage, and embrace the coming chaos!

Susano: We are Susano, and in revelry do we rejoice!

Lyse: That…that’s a primal standing in front of us, right?

 Alisaie: And a horde of angry Kojin at our backs.<sigh> This contest is getting worse by the moment.

Alisaie: Lyse! Help me clear a path!

Alisaie: Leave them to us and save your strength. You’ll be needing it soon enough.

Lyse: Make way, make way!

Susano: Spoil not your appetite for the feast, children of man. The dish will be served, whether you will it or no! Hah hah hah hah haaah!

[FIGHT! With Susano]

Alisaie: <pant> <pant> That…that was not part of the plan! A Kojin primal was most definitely not part of the plan!

Alisaie: …Though I am sure there is a perfectly logical explanation involving the aether stored in the treasures and the religious fervor with which the Kojin guard them. Or something. <sigh> A pity Alphinaud isn’t here to provide it.

 Alisaie: And just when I thought our fortunes had changed. I swear, If Soroban and his people knew this might happen…

Alisaie: …No, somehow I doubt that. Even the Red seemed surprised by what happened.

Alisaie: All rises and falls at the whim of capricious fortune, does it? Then the same goes for him. We have to defeat that primal!

Alisaie: As before, our numbers limit our options. I wish I could claim to have a brilliant plan, but I don’t─all I have is a desperate one.

Alisaie: Lyse, you and I will do our best to draw the Kojin away from the primal. We’ll lead them on a wild-dodo chase all over this isle.

Alisaie: The rest of the plan, I’m afraid you can guess. I’m sorry, Auric, I truly am, but neither of us can even approach Susano, much less hope to defeat him. Which means you’re on your own.

Lyse: Well, who knows? He does have an awful lot of adventurer friends. Maybe some of them decided to take a fishing trip to the Far East, and are surprisingly close by…?

Alisaie: Yes, and I speak fluent Hingan. Come on, there’s no point putting this off!

 [Meanwhile off the coast of Othard]

Tansui: Nary a peep from the shellbacks, sir. It’s enough to make one wonder…

Soroban: The Red have sounded the alarum. The Isle of Zekki under attack; fierce fighting in the stronghold.

Soroban: The vault breached by outsiders, and strange tales from deep within. All this, the Red cannot ignore.

Soroban: Even now, they abandon their posts and flock to the isle. The Garleans are powerless to stop them.

[In Onokoro]

Tansui: I’ll be damned. They did it.

Tansui: Well, Captain…wagers notwithstanding, I daresay we will not have a better opportunity to drive the imperials from Isari and rescue our men.

Tansui: On the other hand, naught was put in writing… But if your mind is made up, then that is that.

Tansui: …I should add that if you were to change your mind, none would gainsay your decision, nor think you beholden to your past.

Tansui: Nor would anyone begrudge you a spot of revenge into the bargain. Like the little miss said, we knew this day would come.

Rasho: Isari may be a rotting husk, but at least the tavern keeper never watered down his drinks.

Tansui: Well said for a temperate man.

Rasho: Hear me, comrades! We made a bargain with the Eorzeans, and I mean to uphold our end of it. I mean to remind the Garleans that this is our sea─that all here belongs to the Confederacy!

Rasho: All that is theirs is ours for the taking─and take it we shall. We will strip them of everything they hold dear!

[Meanwhile in the Inn in Isari]

Grynewaht: This one is iron. My hands will break before he speaks.

Yotsuyu: Ugh, kami give me strength. Are you good at anything?

Yotsuyu: I had hoped this might prove more productive than blind inquiries, but I see you are determined to waste my time. Very well.

[She gestures toward the villagers]

 

Yotsuyu: Line them up. Kill one for every question he refuses to answer.

Gosetsu: Hurt them, and you will get naught from me!

Yotsuyu: You have given me precisely that thus far, so what have I to lose? Mark me, samurai─I will find Lord Hien, be it with your help or with your heads.

[There’s a crashing sound outside.]

???: Confederate scum! You will pay for─ Aaargh!

Hopeful Confederate: The Confederacy! They’ve come to save us!

Yotsuyu: And this after I took such pains to cow them. Even pirates have their pride, I suppose. Enough to march to their deaths, no less. Oh, the stupidity of it all…

Yotsuyu: It truly is a sickness… I shall just have to lance the boil. Drain them of every last trace of honor and compassion… Every last drop…

Grynewaht: My lady, I… I’m going outside!

[The door bursts open and Rasho lunges inside, swinging at Grynewaht and Yotsuyu]

Gosetsu: The kami are not finished with you yet…

 [Elsewhere on the islands, Lyse and Alisaie are fighting the Red Kojin]

Lyse: There’s no end to them! They just keep coming!

Alisaie: Then we must be doing something right. We have to hold out for as long as we can. He’s counting on us!

[A Kojin runs out]:

Red Marine: S-Susano is slain! Slain by the shell-less one!

[The Warrior of Light emerges from the cave.]

Lyse: Is it true? Did you defeat him?

[Yup.]:

Lyse: Well, in that case─how do you fancy helping us keep the Kojin occupied until the Confederacy make their move?

[A plume of red smoke rises into the distant sky]

Lyse: Speak of the devils─that’s coming from Isari!

Alisaie: I think we’ve done all we can here. Let’s withdraw and make for the village.

Lyse: Right! Although…they don’t seem keen to let us go…

Alisaie: Hear me, Kojin of the Red! We have no quarrel with you─only your imperial masters!

Alisaie: No more blood need be shed this day! I pray you let us go in peace!

Red Marine Commander: You dare speak to us of peace!? Your flesh will feed the fishes, thief! Attaaack!

[A Red Kojin attacks Alisaie. She one-shots him.]

Lyse: Now’s our chance! Don’t worry about her─she can handle herself!

Alisaie: I can’t let you take all the glory, can I?

 [Lyse and the Warrior of Light head to Isari]

Lyse: Wait here. I’m going back for Alisaie.

[“I’m coming with you.”]

Lyse: No. Absolutely not.

Lyse: She stayed behind so that you could escape. Even I know that.

Lyse: …I was the one who dragged you all into this. It was my fight, not yours. I knew that from the start, but I also knew I couldn’t do it alone.

Lyse: But I’ve asked too much and let too much happen to you all. I have to make this right─and I have to do it on my own.

Lyse: So let me go, please. I’m asking you as a friend. I have to help her!

Alisaie: You can start by finding me a towel and some bandages. Brrr…

Lyse: Alisaie!

Alisaie: What? Why are you looking at me like that? I said I was going to distract them, not make a heroic and ultimately futile last stand. Who does that, anyway?

[Lyse hugs Alisaie]

Alisaie: For the love of─ This is stupid! You’re embarrassing yourself! And me!

Lyse: Shut up and let me have this.

Lyse: Right. That wasn’t so bad, was it? Now then, we need to hurry back to Isari!

Lyse: I don’t see any soldiers… Do you think the Confederacy drove them off?

 Lyse: Something definitely happened here. I see several people who look like they might be injured. Let’s give them a hand and find out what we missed.

Alisaie: Hm? Do I need help? Oh, I’ll be fine. It’s nothing that won’t heal. You should go after Lyse.

 [In Isari]

Stupefied Senior: Thank you, my child. When the fighting started, I tried to run and hide, but fell and could not regain my feet…

Stupefied Senior: I thought for sure that we would all be slaughtered, but the pirates drove them off! I never thought I would see the day when the Confederacy came to our aid!

 

Flustered Fisher: Uwaaaaaah! Oh, you’re not an imperial. Is…is it over?

Flustered Fisher: Kami be praised! I was certain she would have us all killed and burn Isari to the ground─or kill us after making us watch, or barricade us in our homes before putting them to the torch…

 

Industrious Pirate: I remember you! You’re the one who saved me from the Doman catchers!

Industrious Pirate: Thanks to you, we managed to rescue the fishermen and my kidnapped comrades─one of whom joined the Confederacy with me long ago. It would’ve broken my heart to have had to bury him…

Industrious Pirate: Oh, and if you’re looking for the Captain, you’ll find him in the tavern.

 

Alisaie: Back already? What have you learned?

Alisaie: At the tavern, you say? In that case, we should find Lyse and speak with him together.

Tansui: My Eorzean friends! Saw the smoke, did you? A pity you did not come sooner─though I gather you were busy elsewhere.

Lyse: Gosetsu! You’re alive! You’re all alive…

Gosetsu: And full of vim and vigor, hah hah hah! Did I not tell you I was no stranger to chains?

Alisaie: The fighting cannot have lasted long. Where are all the imperials?

Rasho: Fled. They stood their ground for a time─until it became clear that their Kojin reinforcements would not be coming.

Rasho: We took some few casualties, but my deeper regret is having let Yotsuyu slip through my fingers. That bodyguard of hers may be a half-wit, but he’s a mean bastard on the battlefield.

Tansui: In any event, I imagine all involved are satisfied with this outcome. So far as the Empire is concerned, the Confederacy attacked Isari in retaliation for the viceroy’s actions─and without the aid of insurrectionists, I might add.

Tansui: Suffice it to say, we are prepared to be the subject of their undivided attention for the foreseeable future.

[“Don’t do anything reckless.”]

Rasho: Nor you. Our fates are intertwined now. If you fall, so do we.

Alisaie: Your assistance would be most welcome. Nevertheless, we shall do our utmost to spare you undue danger─we are already in your debt.

Tansui: Nay, little miss, all debts are paid. For by your deeds, many still live who elsewise would not. Let both parties count their blessings, and may fortune continue to favor us all.

Rasho: You still seek to bring freedom to our people, then? You will go to Yanxia?

Gosetsu: I have faith that our allies yet live. Once we have found them, we will plan our next step.

Rasho: Yanxia was the crucible of the rebellion. What happened here pales in comparison to what Yotsuyu did there.

Rasho: Remember this:  fear changes men. Have care in whom you place your trust.

Tansui: And with that, we must take our wounded home. Oh! Your shellback friend sends his regards, and looks forward to your next meeting. Try not to die before then, eh?

Gosetsu: You did well, Auric. Were it not for the tremendous strength and bravery of you and yours, many innocent souls would have suffered terrible fates.

Gosetsu: Though I knew the Confederacy would be loath to meet the imperials in battle, I also knew that if any could win them over, it would be you.

Gosetsu: Truly, yours is a heroic spirit that inspires men to rise above their circumstances─to strive for something greater! It will be an honor to travel with you again.

Gosetsu: Now then, let us not squander the Confederacy’s gift. Yanxia and my countrymen await!

Gosetsu: There is a tunnel to the southwest. We need but follow it to reach our destination. With me!

 [Meanwhile on a beach in Othard]

Red Marine Commander: We cannot rest here for long. This place is not safe…

Red Marine Commander: …Mayhap nowhere is, if thieves can breach our vaults. Nevertheless, it is our duty to protect these treasures, and we shall not fail for want of effort.

Yotsuyu: So this is why you abandoned your posts─and without a word of explanation at that. Rather thoughtless of you, was it not?

Red Marine Commander: Lady Yotsuyu! Pray forgive us our absence, but our home was under attack─our vaults plundered by outsiders!

Yotsuyu: Did you even pause to consider the possibility that it might be a diversion? What is the point of contracting your services if you are not here when they are required?

Yotsuyu: It is my solemn charge to bring these vermin to heel─to torment them, body and soul, until all they hold dear is as bitter ashes in their mouths. And then you go and ruin everything!

Yotsuyu: …Well, there’s naught to be gained in belaboring the point. All that remains is to administer your punishment.

Red Marine Commander: Wait! My lady!

[The screen goes black. There are loud crashes. Then we see all the Kojin dead on the sand.]

Yotsuyu: No…no, it’s no good. There’s just no joy in it. No release.

Yotsuyu: There needs to be some investment. They were negligent imbeciles deserving of punishment, but it was hardly personal. Ten thousand such Kojin could not satisfy me half so well as a single Doman.

[Yotsuyu spies an elegant decorated katana amid the bodies of the Kojin. She picks it up.]

Yotsuyu: And what do we have here? One of the vaunted treasures of the Red? The craftsmanship is certainly impressive…Mayhap we can use it to make amends.

[Grynewaht walks up.]

Grynewaht: How long before Lord Zenos reinstates me, d’you reckon? I’ve got unfinished business back in Eorzea…

Yotsuyu: Is serving me really so unbearable?At least pretend to enjoy it, you witless lump!

Yotsuyu: If you are so desperate to earn a way back to Eorzea, then be quiet and do as you’re told. And bring that sword while you’re at it!


[Lyse narrates: “I remember the silence. How the talking stopped when we first set foot on the plains of Yanxia. Before us stood yet another wall, and through a great magitek field we glimpsed Doma Castle. I’ll never forget the sight…or the anger I felt that day. Life. Liberty. Hope. So much lost, so much taken. As we walked through that war-torn land, no one said a word….”]

Gosetsu: There she is─the humble village of Namai! How delicious her rice; how sweet her persimmons!

Gosetsu: Too long has it been since I saw her with my own eyes. And, for a mercy, the imperials appear to be absent…

Gosetsu: Let no man claim that I am reckless. Prudence has ever been my watchword! Auric─venture closer, if you would, and confirm that there are no soldiers lurking about.

Alisaie: We may be in luck. I don’t see a single imperial soldier.

Gosetsu: Then there is no need to remain hidden. Let us go and greet them as friends.

Lyse: I’m going too!

[Gosetsu walks into the village]

Gosetsu: Good people of Namai, hearken to me! We come in peace and desire only information─to learn of recent events!

Namai Farmwife: Isn’t that the general?

Namai Farmhand: Lord Gosetsu!? Kami preserve, you’re right! He lives!

Gosetsu: I say, brothers and sisters, is aught amiss? Why do you regard me as one would a wild beast? Why is there fear in your eyes? Why do you tremble so?

Gosetsu: Ahhh, but of course! You fear me a vengeful spirit of the dead! Rest assured, naught could be further from the truth. For am I not corporeal? Are my feet not firmly set upon the ground? Hah hah!

Namai Farmwife: What should we do? If they catch him here, you know what will happen…

Namai Farmhand: Of all the times for him to turn up─ Has the old fool lost his mind?

[A Namai youth approaches Gosetsu]

Flustered Youth: You! But… Why have you come here? What do you want from us?

Gosetsu: I know not who you are to speak thus to your elders, boy, but mine only desire is to be received with the hospitality owed a humble traveler─not the fear and trepidation one might afford a wrathful shade!

Flustered Youth: What? What are you going on about? Actually, never mind.Just come with me─now!

[A short distance from the village]

Namai Youth: I don’t know who you people think you are, but do you have any idea what would happen to us if you were found in our village!?

Gosetsu: Again you address us with unwarranted spite! I have let your impropriety pass until now, but no longer!

Gosetsu: Who are you, boy, to speak to me thus? Know you not who I am?

Isse: I am Isse of Namai─a farmer, like my father before me, and his father before him. I wouldn’t expect a man like you to know who I am─but I know you. We all do!

Isse: Lord Kaien’s retainer and leader of the rebellion─Gosetsu! Notorious fugitive, wanted dead or alive by the Empire!

Gosetsu: Hah hah hah hah hah! Is that what this is all about?

Gosetsu: I am hardly the first man to earn the ire of the Empire. Nor will I be the last.

Gosetsu: Was not Namai home to brave and true warriors, who fought beneath our banners for king and country?

Isse: They fought, and they died. Every last one. And then the imperials came looking for more. Because of them.

Isse: They were this close to killing us all─to burning our village to the ground. We’ve only just begun to enjoy some semblance of peace…

Isse: Never again─never again, do you understand!? We’ve had enough of you and yours! Whatever it is you’re plotting, leave us out of it!

[Isse runs off]

Gosetsu: …Hmm. Impassioned as his pleas may be, surely he must know that I cannot leave things as they are.

Gosetsu: But for now, I shall respect his wishes. We must continue on towards our final destination─the House of the Fierce. Proud headquarters of the Doman Liberation Front.

Gosetsu: There is a secret entrance to the north of Namai, by way of a small spring. Come─I will show you!

[By the spring]

Gosetsu: This way, this way! We must dive into the water!

Gosetsu: Have no fear, Auric! It is but a short distance. You need not hold your breath for long!

[Splash! There is a hidden tunnel at the bottom of the spring leading into a spacious cave complex.]

Gosetsu: <pant> <pant> Hah hah hah! How invigorating!

Gosetsu: Congratulations, my friends! You are come to the House of the Fierce!

Liberation Front Guard: You are Auric Seagard, are you not? We were told of your coming.

Liberation Front Guard: Heroes of Eorzea, we of the Doman Liberation Front are honored to receive you. If you would be so good as to follow me…

Lyse: This is the House of the Fierce? But there are so few of them…

Gosetsu: Many kindred spirits remain in hiding following the rebellion. Many others gave their lives for their nation. We are the stubborn remainder.

Gosetsu: Even accounting for our comrades in the field, we are at a fraction of our former strength, ’tis true. Yet we few are patriots─brothers-in-arms, prepared to fight with every fiber of our being to set our people free.

[We hear a familiar voice]

Yugiri: Ever are we hopeful that others will join our cause. But never did I dream that you would journey so far.

Lyse: Yugiri! Gods, it’s good to see you! You look great, by the way! Have you been here long?

Yugiri: I returned but recently, having concluded my mission. Oh, it is good to see you again, my friends.

Gosetsu: Did I hear aright? Your mission is concluded?Then you have found the young master?

Yugiri: Ere we speak of that, I would know by what fortuitous circumstance our friends came to be here.

[We bring Yugiri up to speed on recent events.]

Yugiri: The Empire’s crimes are all too familiar. Lyse─my heart goes out to your people.

Lyse: We wanted to stay and fight, believe me, but we knew it wouldn’t work. We needed more time to rebuild─and more allies to stand with us against the Empire.

Lyse: So we decided to come here and help you free Doma. To show you─to show everyone─that you’re not alone, and that the Garleans can be beaten, if we work together. I’d like to think we proved that in the Ruby Sea…

Yugiri: That you did, Lyse, and far more besides. Needless to say, your assistance would be most welcome.

Gosetsu: Hear, hear! Now then, Yugiri─you must tell me of your search for our master!

Yugiri: Lest you wonder, he speaks of Lord Hien, son of Lord Kaien, who perished during the rebellion.

Yugiri: When it became clear that all hope of victory had gone, Lord Hien bade us deliver as many of our people as we could to safety beyond our borders. But as his father’s heir, he was determined to fight on, and so he did─until he suffered a grievous wound in battle and vanished without a trace…

Yugiri: Until now. For I have found Lord Hien─seen and spoken with him.On the Azim Steppe.

Gosetsu: O boundless and merciful kami, the young master lives! Tell me, was he well? Did his wound yet ail him? Where is he now? Have you brought him back to us!?

Yugiri: You may take comfort in the knowledge that he is hale and whole. However, when I invited him to return with me to Doma, he had this to say…

Yugiri: “If Doma yet thirsts for the blood of patriots and tyrants, I shall offer unto her my blade. But if she has had her fill of bitter draughts, I shall offer unto her conquerors my head.“

Yugiri: Thrice did I declare to him that no true son or daughter of Doma would ever accept such a sacrifice. But for all my passion, he would not be swayed.

Yugiri: “Learn the truth of her heart and return to me,“ he said. And so I left him.

Gosetsu: The words of one made to wear the mantle of leadership too soon…

Gosetsu: Yet there is wisdom in them all the same. If the people no longer yearn to be free, ‘twould be folly to rekindle the fires of war.

Yugiri: To suffer our master to surrender his life and forsake all hope of freedom is by far the greater folly. I will not go to face my fallen comrades having done naught to stop it.

Gosetsu: Nor I, shadow walker, nor I. But we need not rouse our comrades to battle this day. Let us instead welcome our honored guests and allow them a moment of respite.

 [Talking to people in the House of the Fierce]

Gosetsu: Mayhap a brief respite is in order. Were I twenty years younger, these wounds would not warrant a second glance. Alas, no samurai has the strength to defeat that villain Old Age.

Gosetsu: But what say you to the House of the Fierce? Compared to your Rising Stones, I concede it may seem somewhat lacking…

Gosetsu: But it has been a haven these past ten years to all who would set Doma free.

Gosetsu: Regrettably, our efforts in that time have come to little and less…

Gosetsu: <sigh> When the Emperor died, we were so sure the hour of our liberation was at hand. But Zenos soon put paid to that, with the aid of Yotsuyu and the secrets she sold.

Lyse: You should hear this, Auric. He was just telling me about Zenos and the rebellion.

Liberation Front Infantry: What you have to understand is that it was not a simple matter of numbers. The bulk of the XIIth never even took the field. It was Zenos’s stratagems that won the war. They were unlike anything we had ever seen.

Liberation Front Infantry: His formations were unorthodox─bewildering. We honestly thought we had him on the back foot. One moment we were pressing home our advantage, the next we were surrounded and at his mercy.

Liberation Front Infantry: And then he stood before us, his cornered prey. Alone and unarmed. He beckoned us to come forward and fight for our lives.

Liberation Front Infantry: One by one, my comrades charged. Fearless and unflinching, he would dance amidst their blades for a time, and then draw close, as if to embrace…

Liberation Front Infantry: One…after…another. He made us watch. Do you understand? He made us watch.

Lyse: What kind of monster enjoys killing people?

Liberation Front Infantry: …I do not think there was any joy in it. Nor justice, nor morality, nor meaning. To him, the weight of one life is no different from that of a thousand.

Liberation Front Infantry: A challenge had been issued and was accepted. But on finding us no challenge at all, his objective changed.

Liberation Front Infantry: There were tales of imperial soldiers being flayed for slaughtering families. For breaking brave men’s spirits. Only later did I come to understand why. He did not desire obedience. He desired hate…and men consumed by it.

Liberation Front Infantry: A new battle. A new enemy. A new challenge.The hunt, I am told he called it. A hunt without end.

Liberation Front Infantry: And when all our best lay dead and broken, he left.He left, muttering that we had “bored” him.

Liberation Front Infantry: But our weapons, at least, held his interest. For he took a fallen samurai’s sword, having grown…fond of it.

Liberation Front Infantry: Since that day, he has ever wielded Far Eastern blades. He is said to be fascinated by ones with storied histories, and so soldiers who seek to curry his favor often present those of defeated enemies as gifts.

Lyse: It’s like it’s all a game to him. People are suffering─dying─and he’s collecting swords?

Liberation Front Infantry: …We all feel the same. But my lady, you must understand…

Liberation Front Infantry: On the battlefield, reasons do not matter. The victor is not the just, but the strong, and the strong become the heroes of the tale. We were not strong enough.

Liberation Front Infantry: It is not sufficient to be right. To be just. Without strength, our path has but one end…

 

Alisaie: As you can see, they went to great lengths to disable the aetheryte. Apparently, in the twilight days of the rebellion, they feared that Zenos would be willing to risk sending unattuned conscripts.

Alisaie: That said, it is hardly irreversible. They have the necessary materials. It would be a challenge to repair it alone, but mayhap with my brother’s help…

 

Yugiri: Auric. I do hope you have taken this opportunity to rest and recover.

Yugiri: It is well that you spoke with one of the survivors of that massacre. To defeat one’s foe, one must first understand his true nature.

Yugiri: As the Ala Mhigan Resistance has struggled, so too has the Doman Liberation Front. More so, perhaps, given the precarious position in which we find ourselves in the wake of our doomed rebellion.

Yugiri: We are few, and our enemies legion. We are weak, and they strong. Yet with your help, I believe that there is little we cannot achieve… I only hope the depth of our predicament has not shaken your commitment to our cause.

[“Never. Victory will be ours!”]

Yugiri: Aye, that it will. With the hero of Eorzea on our side, we cannot lose!

Yugiri: Now then, I should be glad to discuss our next course of action─

Yugiri: Though now that I think on it, I myself have been away from Doma for some time, and even after my return, the search for Lord Hien commanded my full attention…

Yugiri: Mayhap it would be to both our benefit if we were to see the reality of Doma for ourselves. For did my lord not bid me learn the truth of her heart?

Yugiri: Let us do this together, Auric. Let us go among the people and with our own eyes bear witness to their hardship.

Yugiri: As a foreigner in these lands, your reputation does not precede you. Moreover, unlike Gosetsu, I can accompany you without attracting unwanted attention.

Lyse: I’d like to join you, if that’s all right.

Yugiri: By all means. We should be glad of your company, and your perspective.

Yugiri: Namai is not far. I say we begin there.

[On the outskirts of Namai, Yugiri and Lyse have changed into simple smocks]

Yugiri: Ah, Auric. I am glad to see that you too put thought into your garments given the covert nature of our activities.

Yugiri: Hm? I should think my reasons obvious. To enter the village while wearing the garb of the shinobi would be beyond reckless.

Yugiri: We shall pose as traveling merchants─Auric as our leader, and we as his assistants. Are there any objections?

Lyse: I’m not really the merchant type, but if you think this is the best way to go about it, I’ll trust you.

Yugiri: Then without further ado, let us begin.

 

Honami: Weren’t you the one who came with the general? No? Hmm. I see… My mistake.

Honami: It warms my heart to see traveling merchants in Namai again. Though the imperials never sealed our borders, folks like you have taken to avoiding Yanxia ever since the rebellion.

Honami: Unfortunately, that has only made it harder for us to survive. You may have noticed, but we lack for a great many things. It was not much better before, true, but it has only gotten worse…

 

Miyama: Foreign peddlers? In Namai? Whatever it is you sell, I have no money to buy. Perhaps you should go elsewhere.

Miyama: Saying that, I know of no village in Yanxia that has fared any better. Once, I would have directed you to the samurai lords of Monzen─had they not all died in battle or in the purges.

Miyama: There is the Doman Enclave, of course, but that lies beyond the Dairyu Moon Gates. Needless to say, the imperials are disinclined to let any but their own pass.

 

[There’s a Ferae — wolfman — in the village.]

Masatsuchi: A traveling merchant? With meat, perchance? Bah, better not to know when I have so little coin.

 Masatsuchi: …I feel your eyes upon me. You know not the Lupin? Surely you have not been long in Yanxia, else you would.

Masatsuchi: For generations we served the lords of Doma, compassionate and wise as they were…but the memories of such times fade with every passing day. As others will tell you.

 

Chigusa: You? A merchant? Forgive me my skepticism, but you strike me less a man of commerce and more a common sellsword.

[“Give your best smile.”]

Chigusa: I stand corrected! Such a warm and cordial nature you possess. I pray you forgive me my earlier rudeness.

Chigusa: It has been some time since the viceroy came to our village to purge it of insurgents. Those who resisted suffered terribly, and those who did not fared little better.

Chigusa: We who remain know better than to risk her ire. If the imperials demand laborers, we comply. If they demand conscripts to send as soldiers to other provinces, we obey.

Chigusa: Ours is a difficult life, with little in the way of luxuries. I know not what you sell, merchant, but I doubt that I─nor anyone else here─can afford it.

 

Yugiri: Auric. What have you learned?

Yugiri: Lyse and I encountered much of the same. They have been pushed beyond the brink.

Yugiri: I expected frustration and disillusionment, but not so much that they would come to question the wisdom of opposing imperial rule in the first place…

Yugiri: Unless we can convince them otherwise, I fear I cannot convince Lord Hien to return, and without him…

Yugiri: Let us not yet lose hope. Though the situation in Namai is bleak, mayhap it is not so elsewhere.

Yugiri: I wish to speak with others outside the village. Lyse and I will look for farmers in the paddies to the east. Auric, I ask that you look to the south.

Yugiri: Surely they cannot all have given in to despair…

 [A young girl village is being menaced by two “Tiny Caterpillars.” ….Level SIXTY-FOUR “tiny” caterpillars.]

Azami: Thank you, thank you, thank you! If you hadn’t come along, I don’t know what I would’ve done!

Azami: What am I doing out here? Oh…looking for flowers. I need some for my parents’ graves.

Azami: The ones my brother and I usually bring are yellow, because it was my mother’s favorite color. You haven’t seen any, have you?

[There’s one right over there. By the level sixty-four Hungry Caterpillar. What is with the bugs in this village??]

Azami: Only yellow ones will do. Mother wouldn’t have wanted anything else…

Azami: Ah! You found some! Thank you so much, sir. That’s twice you’ve saved me now!

Azami: Um, if you have some time to spare, maybe you could come with me? I’m sure Mother and Father would want to meet the man who showed me such kindness.

 Azami: We buried them on a cliff to the west of the village. There’s a path through the terraces. I’ll show you!

[Up on the hill]

Azami: We’re here! Just give me a moment to put down the flowers, and I’ll introduce you…

Azami: They loved to meet travelers and hear tales of faraway places. Maybe you could tell them one about your homeland?

???: Azami! Azami! Are you there? Azami!

[Isse comes running up.]

Isse: What in the─ You should not be here! Get away from my sister!

Azami: Don’t be so rude! He saved me from monsters, Brother─he even helped me pick flowers for Mother and Father!

Isse: Go back to the village. Now.

Azami: Y-You’re scaring me─

Isse: I said go! Stay inside and lock the door until I return!

Isse: …Don’t think me ungrateful. My sister is the only family I have. If you saved her, then…thank you. But it changes nothing. I asked you to leave, and now I’m asking you again.

Isse: I’m not going to report you to the imperials, or anything stupid like that. But it’s too dangerous for you to stay here. So please, I’m begging you─just leave us alone!

[“She said your parents were buried here…”]

Isse: …So she told, did she? Yes. That’s right.

Isse: …My mother and father believed in the rebellion. They left to fight for Lord Kaien. They came home on a cart driven by imperial soldiers.

Isse: The soldiers demanded that the families of the insurgents present themselves, or else they’d burn the whole village to the ground.

Isse: So we did. What choice did we have?

Isse: They beat us in the village square─with their hands, with sticks, with anything. They kicked us while we lay on the ground, begging for mercy. They made us denounce my mother and father─call them fools, call them traitors. Say they deserved to die.

Isse: I heard them laugh, but I dared not look up. One leaned close and whispered in my ear what he’d do to my sister if they had to come back.

Isse: They’re gone, but they’re never far. All it takes is the wrong word in the wrong ear, and they’ll return. And then I’ll have to dig another grave. If I’m lucky.

Isse: Whatever you came here to do, leave us out of it. If you want to fight the imperials, go and fight them on your own.

Isse: You can’t help us. No one can. And this is all we’ve got. So please─don’t take it from us.

 [Reporting back to Yugiri]

Yugiri: You are come at a good time, Auric. We but recently completed our inquiries. What of yours?

Yugiri: I…I was not aware of these events… The boy, Isse, he told you all of this?

Yugiri: Such disgraceful, despicable crimes… If I knew the men responsible, I would not hesitate to hunt them down and─

Yugiri: Forgive me, that outburst was unbecoming. The more I learn of the imperials’ actions in my absence, the more difficult I find it to marshal my emotions…

Yugiri: Could Lord Hien have foreseen this? That our peoples’ spirits would be broken so? Though at first I scoffed at his pronouncement, it feels all too possible now that he might resolve to surrender himself…

Yugiri: …Despite everything we have seen and learned, I refuse to renounce this cause.

Yugiri: We should return to the House of the Fierce and consult with our comrades. Perhaps together, we might─

Yugiri: Did you hear that? Quickly, we must find a place to hide!

[I didn’t hear anything, but the ninja said to hide, so I hide.]

[Five Imperial soldiers are coming up the road on foot.]

Lyse: Imperials…

Imperial Pilus Prior: Why are you milling about like a pack of slack-jawed mongrels!?Form a line! Now!

[The villagers line up.]

Imperial Pilus Prior: …Finally. I come before you today to deliver an announcement of the highest import, so listen well.

Imperial Pilus Prior: While on a charitable mission to Isari village, the acting viceroy and her personal guard came under attack from Confederate forces. This brazen, unconscionable act cannot─and will not─go unanswered.

Imperial Pilus Prior: As loyal subjects of the Empire who enjoy her safety and prosperity, you have a duty to defend her as well.

Imperial Pilus Prior: …There is no cause for alarm. We have no intention of sending ill-trained fodder to the front line.

Imperial Pilus Prior: Those who are selected will be expected to perform rudimentary tasks. Cleaning and maintenance and so forth. You will serve only as long as you are needed. Afterwards, you will be free to return to your homes.

[The Imperial leader begins calling out villagers from the line.]

Yugiri: Hmph. The Empire has no pressing need of cleaners. This is but a thinly veiled attempt to intimidate those who supported the Confederacy’s actions, and isolate any whose loyalty they already suspect.

Imperial Pilus Prior: And lastly…you. That should suffice for now.

[The Imperial leader points to Isse.]

[Isse speaks to his little sister.]

Isse: Don’t worry, I will be back before you know it. Listen to the elders while I am away, and do not play outside the village. Everything is going to be fine. I love you, all right? Remember that I love you…

Imperial Pilus Prior: We thank you for your cooperation. Rest assured that this will all be over very soon─once the Confederacy has been made to pay our own “Ruby Tithe.”

[The Imperials herd their chosen conscripts away down the road.]

Lyse: There’s no telling what might happen to those people! We have to help them!

Yugiri: And we shall. But before all else, we must needs ascertain their destination. I doubt this is the first village the Garleans have visited…nor is it like to be the last.

Yugiri: I will track these men. Will you help me?

[Sure.]

[Yugiri turns to Lyse.]

Yugiri: Pray return to our headquarters and tell the others what you saw here. Should we have need of reinforcements, I would know that they are ready.

Lyse: But I should be going with you! I came here to fight!

Yugiri: Soon enough, Lyse. Soon enough. For now, we must proceed with caution.

Lyse: I know that, I do… It’s just─when I saw them rounding those people up… Look, if anything happens─anything at all─you’d better call for us! I mean it, Yugiri. Anything at all.

[Lyse runs off.]

Yugiri: Regardless of what the officer claimed, I fear they have crueler designs for these people.

Yugiri: With me, Auric. We must hurry!

Yugiri: Here. It is a shinobi’s tool, for when a more discreet approach is required. Use it with these darts. They are coated with an alchemical reagent that induces a deep sleep.

Yugiri: There are soldiers patrolling ahead. Were circumstances different we could engage them directly, but for the villagers’ sake we dare not risk it.

Yugiri: We will use our blowguns to incapacitate them. Regardless of your familiarity with such weapons, you are a veteran warrior, and I am sure it will come naturally to you. Nevertheless, practice is in order…

Yugiri: There─the soldier on the hill below. Take aim and fire─if the dart finds its mark, he should fall within moments.

[Fun with blowguns!]

Yugiri: Well done, my friend! Now, give me your map─there is a vantage point from which you may observe and fire upon the other soldiers.

Yugiri: Worry not─I shall be with you every step of the way, keeping watch for other patrols. We shall speak again on the other side of the river.

[Five blowgun darts later….]

Yugiri: Excellent work, Auric. They appear to be none the wiser…

Yugiri: The villagers are being held in the castrum to the south─Fluminis.

Yugiri: Once, it was the base of operations for the Garlean occupation…until ten or so years ago, when they relocated to Doma Castle. Now, the castrum serves as little more than a storage facility…

Yugiri: I spy two sentries near the gate. As you have proven yourself to have impeccable aim, I would ask you to incapacitate them. This very hill should afford you a clear shot.

[2 more blowgun darts….]

Yugiri: Fine work, Auric. You have a gift for the ways of the shinobi…

Yugiri: The way is clear─let us move closer and see what has become of the villagers.

[We spy from outside the gates.]

Imperial Decurion: Sir! The Aan from the other villages are assembled for inspection.

Imperial Pilus Prior: Very good. I will address them personally.

Imperial Pilus Prior: Attention! Shortly you all will be transported to the facility on the distant shore.

Imperial Pilus Prior: Your duties, as you have been previously informed, will be rudimentary in nature. More specifically, you will be tasked with the repair and maintenance of various arms and armaments, as well as magitek devices.

Namai Farmhand: Magitek!? But we’re farmers! We don’t know the first thing about magitek!

Namai Farmhand: It’d take us months, if not years, to learn how to do that kind of work!

Imperial Pilus Prior: The materiel in question was damaged when your kith and kin rose up in rebellion! Therefore, you bear responsibility for its repair!

Imperial Pilus Prior: If you cannot perform your duties, you will learn how. And if you cannot learn how, then your villages may find themselves at the mercy of the Confederacy and other radical elements. Is that what you want?

Imperial Pilus Prior: Deal with this rabble. I am needed at the castle.

Yugiri: This is no temporary measure. Those men and women will die in servitude.

Yugiri: Once they are taken to the other facility, it will be too late. If we are to intervene, we must do so now. Agreed?

Yugiri: Then let us be about it.

Yugiri: Despite the urgency of the situation, we must still proceed with the utmost caution to ensure the safety of the villagers.

Yugiri: To wit, we must infiltrate the castrum without raising the alarum.

Yugiri: I will deal with any soldiers near the entrance. Stand watch for others approaching from the north until you hear my signal.

[For a mercy, you spy no imperial patrols bound for the castrum. A hawk’s cry pierces the silence─Yugiri is waiting.]

[Yugiri is standing watch over three snoring Imperials.]

Yugiri: Speak softly, lest the others hear us. What of the outside?

Yugiri: …That is good. We may proceed as planned.

Yugiri: These ones shall not soon wake. However, the others are too close to the villagers. Incapacitating them as I did these ones is far too risky.

Yugiri: Fortunately, a solution presents itself. I would have you disguise yourself as an imperial soldier and convince them that a changing of the guard is in order.

Yugiri: You have your pick of uniforms. They shall not protest.

[‘Your clothes. Give them to me. Now.’]

Yugiri: You have chosen one to your liking, then? Excellent.

Yugiri: I shall hide these ones where none will find them.

Yugiri: Our sleeping beauties have been laid to rest in their bunks. Oh, and while I was in the barracks, I happened upon these spare uniforms, in case the items in your possession are not to your liking.

Yugiri: This kabuto and tekko should match the uwagi, hakama, and choka in your possession…

Yugiri: And with that, you have a full set. I am sure that once you change, it will seem as though it was bespoke.

Yugiri: You will need to give the soldiers guarding the villagers a proper imperial salute to complete the deception and convince them to come here, where I will be waiting to deal with them.

[Not a problem.]

Imperial Decurion: Is it time already? Not that I’m complaining, mind, but I thought the others would be gone longer…

 Imperial Soldier: Changing of the guard, is it? About bloody time. Just looking at these Aan is making me depressed. Reminds me of when I was in their shoes, pissing myself in fear…

Yugiri: These ones shall sleep soundly along with the others…

Yugiri: And, with that, there are no more soldiers to trouble us. You can dispose of that accursed uniform too.

Yugiri: It is time to guide the villagers to freedom!

[But I kinda like the look of this uniform….oh well.]

[We find the villagers. They’ve been roughed up.]

Yugiri: Listen to me, all of you! We have dealt with the imperials for now, but you must flee this place, quickly!

Formidable Farmer: D-Dealt with them? Oh…oh no…you didn’t kill them, did you?

Namai Farmwife: Are you mad!? There’s no escaping the Empire! Running will only make it worse!

Yugiri: To stay is to die. You know this to be true.

Yugiri: Even if you lack the will to fight, surely you have the will to live! Or has that, too, been beaten out of you? Is this what has become of Doma!?

Isse: You are Lord Hien’s retainer? Trained to fight without fear and obey without question?

Isse: Well, we’re not! We’re lost and afraid! We hate this─all of this─but we can’t do a damn thing to change it! And trying will only make it worse.

Isse: It’s a pathetic existence…but it’s all we’ve got. And when people like you come here pretending it can be different, it─ It doesn’t help, all right!?

Wounded Elder: Peace, boy. Peace. She came to help, and for that we should be grateful.

Yugiri: Elder, your face…

Wounded Elder: We all have scars. Some too many to bear.

Wounded Elder: Too many battles, too much lost. Our friends, our family, even our liege. We who survived are forced to bend the knee─to sell our souls and surrender our dignity.

Wounded Elder: How are we to lift our heads when this shame weighs so heavily upon us? Your courage, your resolve… They are as salt in our wounds.

Yugiri: If they only knew what you would do for them, my lord…

Yugiri: You have made your plight clear, and I shall impose my will no more. But know this, brothers and sisters of Doma.

Yugiri: For all you have suffered─for all the horror and the ignominy─you are still here. You are still alive.

Yugiri: My lord─ My lord prays you value your life as highly as he does. As for me…I swear by all the kami in creation that I will free you from this torment.No matter the cost.

Formidable Farmer: …If the imperials come for me, I will tell them we were tricked by an Auri woman.

Yugiri: Tell them whatever you must to keep your loved ones safe.

[All the villagers except Isse run off.]

Isse: Why would you…? After everything…

[Isse runs off.]

Yugiri: …

Yugiri: Apologies, Auric. I was…lost in thought.

Yugiri: Mayhap they have the right of it. Mayhap we are fools for urging them to rise once more. Yet I believe─I have to believe─that in their heart of hearts, they…they still…

Yugiri: …Now is not the time. We must finish what we started.

Yugiri: I have in my possession a powerful medicine that befuddles the mind and memories. We must administer it to the soldiers ere they wake.

Yugiri: The medicine will leave the soldiers confused and unable to clearly recall recent events. They will suspect that they fell asleep at their posts and be reluctant to discuss it with others.

Yugiri: It is naught more than a temporary measure, but we dare not kill them for the sake of the villagers. Tend to the last two I put to sleep─I shall see to the others.

[Duo of doofuses dumped and doped.]

[Yugiri is down by the riverbank.]

Yugiri: Forgive me for making you search.

Yugiri: It calms me, the sound. It helps me to remember the sway of the ocean when I close my eyes…

Yugiri: Despite the many great and noble things I said, in truth I am not of Doma. I was born beneath the waves of the Ruby Sea…

Yugiri: To think that you were there─that you even spoke with my mother and father…

Yugiri: They are in good health, then. The knowledge is…of great comfort to me.

Yugiri: That I might have the strength to protect my home from the Empire, I left to learn the secrets of the shinobi. Day and night we trained, ever striving to exceed our mental and physical limits.

Yugiri: After a time, my skills were recognized, and I was dispatched to assist the Doman Liberation Front. It was then that I met Lord Kaien and his son, and their loyal samurai, Gosetsu.

Yugiri: Good men, all. Brave and true, so clear their eyes, so pure their purpose. Any shinobi would have been proud to serve them and Doma.

Yugiri: …But, in the end, I will always be of the sea.

Yugiri: Every day, I pray for my home, and for the people I left behind. That they might be spared the wages of war, and live in peace, untouched by this madness.

Yugiri: I confessed this to Lord Hien once. Do you know what he said to me?

Yugiri: He said:   “Good. We are better for the conviction of our allies, and draw inspiration from their example. What is weak alone may together grow stronger.”

Yugiri: Never did I lose faith in them. Even when all was lost, and I led our people to Eorzea, I clung to the belief that our dream would one day be realized.

Yugiri: But when I gazed into those eyes bereft of hope─when those broken men balked at liberty, the dream was shattered.

[“It will not always be so.”]

Yugiri: So I pray… And thus do I labor to see a new day dawn, regardless of my misgivings. When all is said and done, we can but carry on─together.

[A flying vessel appears in the sky above the river.]

Yugiri: An imperial airship…

Yugiri: It is bound for Doma Castle. Quickly, we must rejoin the others!

[Back in the House of the Fierce]

Yugiri: Come, come! We must tell the others of this airship, or hear what they know of it!

Lyse: There you are! What happened? Are the villagers all right?

Yugiri: W-We freed them, along with many others.

Yugiri: Gosetsu─we spied an airship bound for the castle. Know you aught of it?

Gosetsu: Aye, that we do… The crown prince is come to Doma.

Alisaie: We suspect this is the result of recent events in Gyr Abania. Our defeat notwithstanding, there appears to be some concern in Garlemald that subversive elements may be rallying in other provinces.

Alisaie: Though Yotsuyu governs Doma, Zenos remains the province’s anointed viceroy─and it would seem he has come to assess the current situation in person.

Yugiri: If Zenos is here, we must seize this opportunity and kill him.

Alisaie: Would that it were so simple, Lady Yugiri. You may recall that we encountered Zenos at Rhalgr’s Reach. We have seen firsthand what he can do. His power defies explanation.

Alisaie: He faced the Alliance, the Resistance and the Scions, and he defeated us all.

Alisaie: We survived and learned from the experience, it is true─but if we are to defeat him, it will not be through simple opportunism. We will require a flawless plan.

Yugiri: We know his strengths. A prodigious swordsman trained from childhood by the finest imperial tutors, reputed to be without equal on the battlefield. Which is why we must not meet him there.

Yugiri: Nay, we keep to the shadows─the domain of the shinobi. And thence we strike. You need only give me the chance.

Gosetsu: Were this but a matter of personal revenge, I would not presume to bar your path, for I myself crave that same vengeance.

Gosetsu: But to draw steel against the Emperor’s son is a grave decision, and one that will shape our nation’s future. Do not forget Lord Hien’s words!

Yugiri: What, that we should sheathe our swords if the people lack the will to fight!? I will not squander this opportunity! If we do naught, our master’s life is forfeit!

Gosetsu: Even should you succeed, Zenos’s death will not win Doma her freedom─more likely her doom.

Gosetsu: Can we defend our people against the Empire’s retribution? We few against a legion? Do not be a fool, child!

Yugiri: …Mayhap I am a fool with foolish dreams of a future that will never be. But I cannot─I will not forsake them!

[Yugiri stomps off.]

Lyse: Yugiri, wait!

Alisaie: …What now?

Gosetsu: I will not pursue her. It is for her to think on our master’s words and recognize the futility of her course.

Gosetsu: Those, at least, are my thoughts upon the matter. Yours may be different. Should you wish to give chase, I will not bar your path.

Gosetsu: …We each have but one life, and it is not to be spent recklessly in pursuit of our goals. I pray she realizes this soon…

[Yugiri is down by the river with a message hawk.]

Yugiri: …Did Gosetsu send you to stop me?

Yugiri: Then you came of your own free will? I should be surprised if you agreed with my chosen course. No one else did.

Yugiri: But it is not as fanciful as they would have you believe. Scant moments ago, I received the crown prince’s itinerary from one of our spies in the castle.

Yugiri: ‘Twould seem that Zenos has no desire to remain in Doma any longer than necessary. He wishes to inspect the Moon Gates this very eve.

Yugiri: His impatience is to our advantage. He arrived without warning and gave Yotsuyu no time to prepare. The whole castle is in state of upheaval.

Yugiri: To avoid any delay, he has declined a full escort, and will be traveling with no more than a handful of soldiers. The kami could not have blessed us with more auspicious circumstances. I will kill him, Auric. I will.

[“You mean WE will kill him.”]

Yugiri: …Or die trying. You understand the risks.

Yugiri: Forgive me. Of course you do. Mayhap better than I.

Yugiri: …But are you sure?

Yugiri: Thank you. Thank you. I…I cannot well express what this means to me.

Yugiri: We have much to discuss, but we can do so on the way.

Yugiri: Yuzuka Manor is some distance from here. We must hurry!

[Uh oh, we had an eavesdropper. Sloppeh, Yugiri.]

Isse: …Stay calm. No one knows you were here. No one knows you saw anything.

Isse: No one knows you overheard two rebels plotting…to kill the crown prince…

Isse: Gah! Stupid, stupid, stupid! You know how this ends! And they only have themselves to blame! You have to tell them. You have to…

[Isse runs off.]

[Off in the southwest, a good distance from the village.]

Yugiri: This is far enough. Let us discuss our plan of attack…

Yugiri: Zenos’s itinerary is as follows…

Yugiri: He will depart Doma Castle by ship and approach the Moon Gates. The magitek field will be deactivated briefly, allowing his vessel to pass. It will then continue on to these very docks, where he and his entourage will disembark.

Yugiri: As you can see, this area is not ideal for an ambush. Wide open, multiple avenues of escape. The manor is better suited to our needs.

Yugiri: Let us split up and search for suitable hiding places.

[Surrounded by walls and deserted, this location appears to be ideal for concealment…]

Yugiri: Ah, there you are.

Yugiri: Hmm… From the roof, we would have a clear view of the docks…

Yugiri: It is settled. We shall lie in wait here until Zenos arrives.

Yugiri: As discussed, if all goes to plan, he shall fall with my first blow. If not, then the two of us will have to engage him in open combat.

Yugiri: His escort is of no consequence, which means that we will have a two to one advantage. Nevertheless, he is not to be underestimated…

Yugiri: All that remains is to wait. I trust that you are ready?

[Ready as I’m going to get….]

Yugiri: He comes.

[Yugiri leaps off the rootop to take up her position.]

Imperial Pilus Prior: The village is not far, my lord.If it please you, we shall escort you there directly.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Hmph. Less a province than a graveyard. The rotting husk of a broken nation, devoid of proper sport. <sigh> But as His Radiance wishes…

Imperial Pilus Prior: Y-Yes, of course, my lord! A-And may I say how terribly sorry we are that you had to come so far!

Zenos Yae Galvus: We labored long to sow the seeds of hatred, of fear─to train them as beasts. Now we shall see the harvest.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Let there be savage beasts baying for blood, and not hollow-eyed prey cowering in the dark, or there will be no joy in this hunt.

[Yugiri silently takes out Zenos’ two rear escorts, but when she makes her strike, Zenos it ready and blocks her attack with his sword.]

Imperial Pilus Prior: AMBUUUSH!

 Yotsuyu: Shinobi!? And me without my brute…

Zenos Yae Galvus: How weak you are. Is this the sum of your hate?

Yugiri: This is only the beginning! For Lord Kaien! For Doma!

[Zenos addresses Yotsuyu]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Mayhap I shall test this new blade of yours. Let us hope it is to my liking, lest your misfortunes compound.

[He turns to Yugiri]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Then again, I am loath to expend such effort on the unworthy. Come─earn the honor.

[We charge]

Yugiri Mistwalker: Zenos yae Galvus! You will die by my hand!

Zenos Yae Galvus: First you must kill my men. You can do that, can you not?

Yotsuyu: What are you doing, you fools!? There are only two of them!

Zenos Yae Galvus: Hm. How much longer must you make me wait?

Zenos Yae Galvus: Very well. I suppose you have earned this…

Yugiri Mistwalker: This is not a game, you twisted, arrogant bastard!

Yugiri Mistwalker: Graaagh!

Zenos Yae Galvus: Well done, beast. You have earned the right to look on the Ame no Habakiri.

[Zenos powers up with the ancient Kojin sword Yotsuyu gave him. Figures. Yugiri tries to limit break him but he shrugs it off.]

Yotsuyu: What…what is this…? Kami forfend…

Yugiri Mistwalker: No! I can still fight, I can still…still…

[Fight! Fight! …Fight some more. Impasse.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: You’re better than most, I’ll grant you that. But not good enough. This ends now.

[Zenos one-shots the Warrior of Light. Again. Jerk.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Ahhh…I remember you. Ala Mhigo. The champion of the savages.

[The Warrior of Light stares at the katana Zenos is holding. For some reason, he hears Urianger’s voice repeating what he said before : “Look ye where the sun doth rise, see crimson embers, dark’ning skies…Look ye where the sun doth fall, see azure lost amidst the squall.“]

[ Zenos appears ready to strike a killing blow, but then a tiny piece of one of his helmet’s ornamental horns falls off. This appears to fascinate Zenos. He takes off his helmet.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Oh…how right I was to spare your life.

[Zenos drops his helmet to the ground.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Hear me, hero. Endure. Survive. Live.

Zenos Yae Galvus: For the rush of blood, for the time between the seconds─live. For the sole pleasure left to me in this empty, ephemeral world─live!

[While Zenos is distracted, Yugiri sees her chance and strikes at his back. Once again, Zenos blocks her effortlessly, throwing her to the ground.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: You are not worthy.

[He walks over to Yugiri to land the killing blow. But an arrow strikes the ground at his feet. He looks up.]

[The Namai villages have arrived, weapons in hand, with Isse at their head.]

Isse: Get away from them, you imperial dog!

Yugiri: No, don’t… You must…you must flee!

Isse: We’re not going anywhere! Do you hear me!? We’re not running away!

Isse: What you’re doing is stupid and reckless and I never wanted any part of it, but here we are!

Isse: I’ve spent my whole life hating myself─for every time they made me beg, for every time I held my tongue to protect the people I love.

Isse: And then you came along and reminded me of all the things I never said and never did, and it was even worse! I would have given anything to forget, to walk away, but I knew that I’d never be able to live with the guilt.

Isse: So we came─all of us! For you, for ourselves─for Doma!

[Zenos seems bored.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Death is death, regardless of the reason.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Yet you seem determined to die, intruding upon this sacred ground, turning weapons you can scarcely wield upon me. Your lives will not even begin to redress the balance.

Alisaie: How wrong you are!

[Alisaie and Gosetsu have arrived. Alisaie throws a smoke bomb.]

Alisaie: Go, now! Gosetsu─see to Yugiri!

Gosetsu: Aye!

Yotsuyu: <cough> <cough> I can’t see a damn thing… Someone stop them!

[Zenos turns and walks calmly away, smiling.]

Yotsuyu: My lord!?

[The Imperials withdraw from the field.]

Alisaie: I don’t think we were followed…Gods… I have no idea what was going through that man’s head, but I am heartily glad he decided to leave.

Alisaie: Oh, and don’t thank us. Thank Alphinaud. He’s at the House of the Fierce, patiently awaiting your gratitude.

Alisaie: You should’ve seen the way he turned pale when he heard about Yugiri’s plan─and how you of all people had decided to help her. He was in such a panic, barking orders, calling for a squadron to be assembled─

Gosetsu: As were you.

Alisaie: I was rather composed, as I recall. Though that is neither here nor there…

Isse: Can you believe it? We faced the crown prince himself and lived to tell the tale!

Isse: You’ve no idea what this means for us. Everyone’s talking about getting more weapons and armor and…and…

Isse: And we’re not going to stop until we’ve taken back our homeland!

Isse: Ah, right. Getting a bit ahead of ourselves, aren’t we? We’ve got wounded to tend to first. We should get back to the village!

[Back at Namai village]

Isse: How are you feeling? After fighting that demon, I can only imagine…

Isse: …I suppose I ought to apologize to you. For…you know…

Isse: Anyway, uh… Thank you. For not giving up on us. The shinobi too.

Namai Maiden: How are you feeling, my lady?

Yugiri: Much the better for my comrades’ ministrations, and your most generous hospitality. You need not worry.

Namai Maiden: Good… If there is anything else we can do for the two of you─anything at all─just ask.

[Isse is watching the group intently.]

Gosetsu: Stare any harder and you’re like to burn a hole in them. Go and say your piece for goodness’ sake!

Isse: I’ve got nothing more to say to them! I’m going to find out how the others are getting on.

[Isse runs off.]

Yugiri: Gosetsu, Mistress Alisaie─I owe you an apology. I acted with reckless disregard for my own safety, and endangered I know not how many others in so doing.

Yugiri: Scorning your wise counsel, I knowingly defied our master’s wishes, and left you no choice but to follow suit.

Gosetsu: Nonsense. I followed our master’s wishes to the letter. Consider once more his words, and the intent therein.

Gosetsu: In offering his head, he but sought to shield his people from harm─loyal retainers included. You must value your life more highly, shadow walker.

Alisaie: On the other hand, your recklessness did serve as an inspiration to many. Mayhap you should not be so hard on yourself…

Alisaie: In any event, if you must apologize profusely, it seems only right that you expend as much effort thanking the one person who supported your plan from the first.

Yugiri: That it does. There are no words which will suffice…but thank you.

[Lyse and Alphinaud run up.]

Alphinaud: Twelve be praised! When I learned of your rather questionable plot to assassinate Zenos, I feared we would need to recruit a new primal slayer.

Lyse: I’m sorry we couldn’t be there. Alisaie made me swear to stay behind no matter what.

Lyse: I think she was worried I’d hurl myself at Zenos the moment I set eyes on him.

Alisaie: …What?

Alisaie: You’ll forgive me for changing the subject, but now would seem a good time to discuss where we go from here. Though the Empire has yet to retaliate, the fact remains that we have revealed our presence, and signaled our intentions in so doing. It is only a matter of time before the imperials move against us.

Alisaie: Given that we lack the strength to oppose them, ’tis plain some manner of brilliant stratagem is required. Therefore, I yield the floor to the preeminent tactician of our time, with whom I was privileged to share a womb.

Alphinaud: If you insist… While in Kugane we debated a number of approaches and were eventually forced to concede that we cannot look to the Alliance for aid.

Alphinaud: Even were it possible to ferry sufficient forces and materiel from Eorzea in a timely manner, such a massive undertaking would not long escape the attention of the Empire. ‘Twould be a miracle if our ships reached the shore.

Alphinaud: Fortunately, according to Tataru and Hancock’s intelligence, the Empire has withdrawn most of its forces from Doma in the past year, leaving her relatively unguarded.

Alphinaud: That being the case, a popular uprising spearheaded by the full might of the Doman Liberation Front may feasibly be sufficient to threaten the seat of provincial government, namely Doma Castle. ‘Twould be rather easier said than done, of course, but I have seen worse plans prevail.

Gosetsu: Then we must needs meet with Lord Hien and convince him to return, for there is no surer way to inspire our people to rise up as one.

Gosetsu: He desired proof of his subjects’ conviction, and they have provided it─through no less a deed than openly opposing Zenos himself!

Lyse: It will work. It has to work. And next time, we will defeat him…

Yugiri: I will be traveling to the Azim Steppe, Auric.

Yugiri: I found Lord Hien once before, and I am confident I can do so again. Moreover, it was to me whom he put the question of Doma’s resolve. I feel it my duty to deliver to him our people’s reply.

Gosetsu: Our countrymen’s deeds speak for themselves. Lord Hien cannot deny the truth of their hearts.

Gosetsu: Too long has it been since I looked on his face. It would be of great comfort to see him again─and no small comfort if you were to join us in the search, I should add!

Lyse: I wonder what kind of man Hien is. From what I heard, he’s about the same age as me. Then again, so is Fordola.

Lyse: Like her, he was born and raised in an imperial province. This is all he’s ever known. But unlike her, he chose to do something about it…

Lyse: I want to meet him. I want to know why. Maybe, if I understand that, it’ll help me to understand a lot of other things…

Alisaie: The beloved king returning to urge his countrymen to rise up in rebellion. Not a story you’d ever hear in Sharlayan or Ul’dah, is it?

Alphinaud: Not in those words, perhaps, but no land’s people is so cynical to be wholly immune to inspiration. Singular individuals have the power to move hearts and minds no matter where they go.

Alisaie: Mmmhm. Doubtless you speak from personal experience.

Alisaie: As much as this Lord Hien intrigues us, Auric, there are vital tasks to be attended to here─preparations for the inevitable assault on Doma Castle, for one.

Alisaie: There is also the matter of coordinating our efforts with the Confederacy and our comrades in Kugane, dealing with this troublesome aetheryte─I could go on, but you understand.

Alphinaud: …Aye, so it goes. We all have our responsibilities.

Yugiri: We shall depart for the Azim Steppe at once.

Gosetsu: You will be joining us, Auric?

Alisaie: For our part, we shall do what we can to aid the Doman Liberation Front in your absence.

Alisaie: We will refrain from conducting any large-scale operations in your absence, and instead devote our energies to bolstering our ranks and training our new recruits. When you return, we will be ready for war.

Lyse: If anything happens, if you need us to come back sooner, you’d better contact us. “Noble sacrifices” are a last resort, remember?

Yugiri: Follow me, my friends. We have many malms to travel before we reach Reunion.

Isse: Wait! Don’t leave yet!

Isse: Here, take these for the road. It’s simple fare, but it’s the least we can do for you, after what you did for us.

Isse: …It may be stupid and naive of me to say this, but I will.

Isse: When you come back, we’ll finish what we started. We’ll beat the imperials and we’ll win our freedom! So…don’t keep us waiting too long!

[Meanwhile in the Keep at Doma Castle]

Zenos Yae Galvus: …I would expect no less of Bahamut’s conqueror.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Prepare the airship. His Radiance will not object; we have fulfilled our obligations here. I would see this prize for myself…

[Zenos walks over to where Yotsuyu and Grunewaht are kneeling. He grabs Yotsuyu by the hair and yanks up hard on it. Yotsuyu gasps in pain.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Do you understand why I appointed you to act in my stead? You, whose only accomplishment was to whisper the right words in the right ear?

Zenos Yae Galvus: Because of your petty hatreds.They render you the perfect instrument to bleed your kinsmen of hope─to make an example of Doma, such as was ordered.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Listen well.

[Zenos jerks Yotsuyu’s hair again.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: If you yield Doma to the rebels, you will not be given another chance to beg forgiveness.

[He drops her.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Do your duty. Now. Or die with the rest of them.

[Zenos leaves.]

Grynewaht: A-Are you all right, my lady? That was uncalled for…

[Yutsuyu backhands him.]

Yotsuyu: They say your Eorzean is helping the rebels.

Yotsuyu: I want him dead. I want his friends dead. I want the heads of everyone he knows and loves mounted on the castle walls!

Grynewaht: You mean…you mean I can finally go after him?

Grynewaht: Bwahahahaha! I’ve been waiting for this chance! I promise you, my lady─he won’t escape this time! Not this time, oh no!

[Meanwhile, in the Fringes of Gyr Abania.]

[A mysterious man in black stands looking down into a deep round mountain pit.]

???: Aye, this is the place.

???: …When his shade was banished, you swore to leave this life behind. And yet here you are…

[It’s…Estinien??]

Estinien: Yet if this be the work of the Eyes, what choice do you have but to end it? <sigh> Or so the boy would say. Damn you, Alphinaud.

[Back in Namai]

Yugiri: If all are ready, let us depart for Reunion in the Azim Steppe.

Yugiri: Our route will be somewhat circuitous. We will need to return to the Ruby Sea and head north along the coast, past Isari…

[In Isari]

Yugiri: From here we will turn north until we arrive at a cave, through which we must pass in order to reach the Azim Steppe.

Yugiri: Lyse and Gosetsu have already gone on ahead. We should carry on as well.


[Lyse narrates: I remember the emptiness. Vast and endless. The Azim Steppe, home to countless roaming tribes. A sacred land watched over by the elder gods. Here we would find Doma’s salvation. With the wind at our backs we walked on. In search of hope. In search of him.]

Yugiri: I give you the Azim Steppe, Auric. Though I should say that this is but one small portion of it.

Yugiri: Despite the close proximity, Domans rarely venture this far north. Most find these lands and their people strange and foreign…

Yugiri: Fortunately, those who frequent Reunion are more welcoming than most. Come─it is not much further.

[In Reunion village]

Yugiri: Welcome to Reunion, my friends. Here is where we will begin our search for Lord Hien.

Yugiri: When last I spoke with Lord Hien, he said he spent much time in these markets. I had hoped we might find him here today, but alas…

Lyse: Hey, Yugiri, I’ve been meaning to ask─there are an awful lot of Xaela here, aren’t there?

Yugiri: Oh, I assumed you knew. The Azim Steppe has been home to the nomadic tribes of the Xaela since antiquity.

Yugiri: More than fifty roam these lands, and though they do not constitute a nation, there is a hierarchy of sorts, determined through ritual combat.

Lyse: Funny… If they’re so busy fighting each other, you’d think the Empire would be able to march in and take the Steppe with ease. I wonder why they haven’t…

Gosetsu: Why indeed, Lyse? Why indeed…

Gosetsu: Perhaps they see little value in it, especially given the fierce reputation of the Xaela warriors who would fight tooth and nail to oppose them.

Yugiri: These lands were not made for men. The soil is thin, and the weather unforgiving.

Yugiri: The Xaela found ways to survive, it is true. But they are made of sterner stuff than most imperials─conscript or citizen.

Lyse: Thanks for taking the time to explain. It sounds like I’ve got a lot to learn. Later, I mean. We’re meant to be looking for Hien!

Yugiri: People from many tribes gather in Reunion to trade goods and information. I should be surprised if we cannot learn something of value here.

Yugiri: Let us make our inquiries separately. Auric, why don’t you speak with some of the merchants here?

Chambui: Buuz! Fresh buuz! Your choice of lamb or dzo! Guaranteed to satisfy! How many will you have, sir?

Chambui: Eh? A Doman? Unless another Dazkar is keeping him in her yurt, he is not here. <snort> More fool her if she took a Doman for a husband.

Chambui: But enough about Domans─let us speak of buuz instead! You cannot come to the Azim Steppe and not sample this most traditional of delicacies!

Yesui: What fortune you have to come hither at this time! Freshly slaughtered, every cut available on request. Organs too─hearts, livers, brains. Or a brace of blood sausages, if you desire only a snack!

Yesui: A Doman? Poor meat they make, Domans─ I jest, I jest. Hmm…I did see a young Mol in the company of one some few days ago…

Baidur: Roasted fish with pumpkin! An exotic foreign delicacy, cooked to perfection, beloved without the Steppe! Come, come!

Baidur: You seek Domans? Then you are come to the wrong place, my friend. Delicious as my foodstuffs are, they find little favor with those from the south.

Baidur: Now, if it were Goro you were looking for, on the other hand, then I might be able to help you. They flock to my stall!

Goro Horsemaster: I have brought you a new brush, my beloved. So smooth and silky your mane shall be─the envy of every other man…

Goro Horsemaster: Hm? Say again? You are seeking who?

Goro Horsemaster: Ah, the Doman. I know of whom you speak. He comes and goes with a Mol girl.

Goro Horsemaster: Though I could not describe her. I only know that she is Mol because I heard them talking as they passed.

[With the chat mode in Say, use your keyboard or the software keyboard to enter any phrase that contains “Mol” to ask the Xaela in Reunion if they are of the Mol tribe.]

Narengawa: I am Ura, if you must know. Come down from the mountains in the north. If there is nothing else…

Ucugen: You take me for a Mol!? I am Oronir! Compare me not with ones so weak and lowly!

Cirina: …Yes? I am Mol. My name is Cirina. May I help you?

Cirina: Oh… Oh, I see. You are looking for Hien. In that case─

Masgud: How urgent this business must be to leave our conversation unfinished!

Masgud: The kinsai. Will you buy it? There is but one bundle left. If not, then─

Cirina: I will, I will! Though I had not thought to pay so high a price…

Masgud: It is a bargain for which you should be grateful. If you lack the coin, then the fault is your own, and you will leave with nothing.

Cirina: Please, I must have the kinsai! The gods themselves requested it! We are bound to their will!

Masgud: …Pay me the difference in whisperroot. I will sell it to the next apothecary to pass through Reunion, and we will each feel fairly treated.

Masgud: But do not tarry. Should another come before you, coin in hand, I will not refuse him.

Cirina: I understand. Thank you for this kindness!

Cirina: I am sorry, but we must speak of Hien later. I cannot leave Reunion without that kinsai…

Cirina: You…you want to help me, is that it?

Cirina: I do not know what to say… Thank you, Auric, thank you!

Cirina: The lumbering ones we must fell wander the plains to the west of Reunion. If we each harvest two, then we should have enough whisperroot.

Cirina: Return here when you have finished. Good luck!

[Two whacked tree-things later…]

Cirina: Welcome back, Auric. Have you brought the whisperroot?

Cirina: Blessed is he who shows kindness to strangers, for with fortune does he ever ride.

Cirina: Will this quantity suffice?

Masgud: It shall. The kinsai is yours.

Masgud: The gods favor you more than you know, child. Udgan rarely have need of such herbs, and so my stock is limited. Had you come a day earlier or later, I would have none for you.

Cirina: Perhaps the gods guided me here, as they guided Grandmother. As they guided this man from the West…

 Lyse: Hey! How goes the search? Any luck?

 Gosetsu: Ho, what fortune to meet a friend of the young master!

 Yugiri: Well met, Cirina. If you have an inkling as to the current whereabouts of Lord Hien, we should be most grateful for your assistance.

Cirina: Oh, please… It is I who should be grateful.

???: Hold! What is this!? I came first─you second!

[There’s an argument starting up nearby in the market between two Au Ri men.]

Impetuous Warrior: Know you to whom you speak? All people of the Steppe should. Or have you fought so much that you have forgotten the face of your superiors?

Derring-do Dandy: Superiors!? I spit on your superiority, little prince. Twisted and mad as sand devils, your kind are!

Lyse: Those two don’t seem to like each other very much…

Cirina: Those boys are of the Oronir and Dotharl. The two strongest tribes.

Cirina: The Children of Azim are destined to rule. So they declare to all who will listen. Their word is law─for now.

Cirina: Grand, flamboyant fighters…but deadly. Very deadly. He prances as a horse, as do his brothers after their many recent victories.

Cirina: The undying ones too are strong. Fearless and vicious, they often reigned in the past. Now, they are sorely tested.

[A third Au Ra man walks up. The arguing pair back down.]

Cirina: Ah, the master of the markets. He is Qestir.

Cirina: To fight in Reunion is forbidden, and to break the peace is to be banished forever. This he says without words, for words are lies to the Qestir.They do not speak.

Lyse: That’s…interesting. And all these different tribes share the same lands, do they? No wonder it’s tense…

Derring-do Dandy: Hmph! I shall look for you on the field at the Naadam. Mark my words!

Impetuous Warrior: Hah hah hah! As shall I! Mayhap I shall take eleven more Dotharl heads to make a dozen with yours. I look forward to the day.

Yugiri: Their dispute will be settled at the “Naadam”?

Cirina: A great battle held on the final day of the Tsagaan Sar.

Cirina: During this time, all bonds of hierarchy are broken. All Xaela are equal and free to prepare for the fight.

 Cirina: The tribe which triumphs in the Naadam rules until the next Tsagaan Sar.

 Cirina: Which, in these lands, is now.

Cirina: Not all seek the Dawn Throne. Some are satisfied with their lot. Others, like the Qestir, have reason to remain neutral.

Cirina: The Mol are lambs among wolves. Long were we content to remain apart and live quietly, but…

Cirina: Never mind that! You seek Hien, yes? I know where he may be.

Cirina: Long ago, my grandmother, having received a vision from the gods, bade me go forth into the southern mountains. It was there that I found Hien, near death from many wounds.

Cirina: I brought him to our village, and there we nursed him back to health. Afterwards, he chose to remain, that he might repay us for our kindness.

Cirina: Domans set much store by honor and shame, so at first I did not question it…

 Cirina: Excuse me. If I could see your map for a moment… Here─he has grown fond of this place. It affords him a view of the markets and the Steppe.

Cirina: I would accompany you, but I must return to our village to prepare my grandmother’s meal. Thank you again for your assistance!

Yugiri: Our long-awaited reunion is at hand! Come, my friends─let us go and greet our lord and master!

[Hien is hanging out on a grassy rise near Reunion]

Gosetsu: The kami are merciful! My lord Hien, I see you are alive and well!

Hien: Ah… You are come sooner than expected.

Hien: So. My blade or my head. Which would you have of me?

Yugiri: The people of Yanxia remain loyal to Doma. I have seen the fire in their eyes─they are ready to rise up and fight.

Yugiri: The time is ripe, my lord. Return with us, blade in hand, and lead Doma to freedom.

 Hien: Naught less than liberty will suffice, then? A pity. It will prove far more difficult to deliver than my head.

Hien: But if my people wish to pursue an impossible dream, then who am I to deny them?

Hien: Yugiri! Gosetsu! And…uh…?

Yugiri: The Scions of the Seventh Dawn, my lord─good and true friends who opened their hearts and homes to us when we fled to Eorzea.

Yugiri: Far across the sea they have journeyed to stand with us in the fight for Doman liberation─to oppose the Empire, as they have in the West, where they are lauded as heroes for their many deeds─

Hien: Say no more, Yugiri. Say no more.

Hien: I observed how you helped Cirina, to whom I am deeply indebted. For that, and for the aid you provided my people, you have my deepest gratitude.

Hien: There is no doubting your strength, nor your character. It would be my honor to fight by your side.

Hien: So. What of Doma? Arise, my friends, and tell me of our home.

[Hien is brought up to speed.]

Hien: I have made my decision. Yugiri, I bid you return to Yanxia and take charge of our forces in preparation for my homecoming. As for our esteemed guests, I would ask that you remain here with me. I sense you will be a great help in the coming days.

Yugiri: Your will is my command, my lord, but…how much longer do you intend to stay?

Hien: Oh, only until I have won the contest. I mean to return at the head of a Xaela army.

Yugiri: You mean to participate in the Naadam?

Hien: Have you a better idea? Consider how soundly we were defeated before. The imperials may have since grown weaker, but we are weaker still.

 Hien: ‘Twould be folly to challenge them without first supplementing our forces. So yes, I intend to win the Naadam and enlist the aid of every able-bodied Xaela I can!

 Hien: Furthermore, by championing the Mol in the contest, I can at last repay their kindness. Lest you forget, they saved me from certain death─and a man who suffers such debts to go unpaid is without honor and unfit to lead.

Gosetsu: Hah hah hah! Just so, just so.

Gosetsu: Our lord has spoken, Yugiri. But take heart─I shall keep him safe…and should it come to it, bring him back by force.

Yugiri: This is no laughing matter, Gosetsu. But if these are my orders… Very well.

[To the Warrior of Light]

Yugiri: Once more I place my faith in you. Pray look after them both.

[Yugiri vanishes to go about her work.]

Lyse: Looks like it’s up to us, then… Though it does seem a bit risky. Isn’t Hien meant to be the next king of Doma or something?

Hien: So they say…though, in truth, I am but a pale reflection of my late father. All the more reason to entreat your assistance.

Hien: For ours is an impossible dream─to set in motion a revolution that will rattle the very firmament, and shake off the yoke of the most powerful empire in the world!

Hien: Auric Seagard, was it? Once again, allow me to thank you for your many deeds in service to Doma.

Hien: For twenty-five years did my father rule in name only. My rule─if one would deign to call it that─has been naught in comparison.

Hien: That changes now. We have a purpose and a plan, and after we take to the battlefield together, we will have victory as well.

Hien: But you are a practical man. I can tell. Disinclined to trust in words when actions speak truer. I can relate…

Hien: So─you too have heard of the Naadam.

Hien: “The great battle for supremacy of the Steppe.“ I learned of it during my stay with the Mol.

Hien: To my knowledge no foreigners have ever triumphed, much less participated in a Naadam. But, lack of precedent notwithstanding, I should think we would have good standing to bid them march with us to Doma─should we win.

Gosetsu: Will they even permit us to fight, my lord? We belong to no tribe of the Steppe.

Hien: We are not without options, given what Cirina has told me.

Hien: You see, in accordance with the gods’ wishes, her people shall participate in the coming Naadam…

Hien: …And when they take the field, I mean for us to fight alongside them as fellow warriors of the Mol.

Hien: But we need not discuss this at length here. Come, let us head north to Mol Iloh, where Cirina and her people have made camp for this season.

[North of Reunion]

Hien: My friends, I give you Mol Iloh!

Hien: The khanun of the tribe, Temulun, resides in the largest yurt. We should go and make our introductions.

[Inside the yurt. Temulun is a elderly female Au Ra.]

Temulun: At last, the traveler comes…

Hien: Temulun Khatun, Cirina, I am returned.

Cirina: Ah, you found each other!

 Temulun: Ours is the soil, Hien. The Doman’s and the Eorzeans’, too.

Lyse: You know us?

Temulun: The gods know you, child…as do the stars in the heavens, which shone bright at your coming.

Cirina: The Mol hearken to the whispers of the elder gods, which guide us in our daily lives. We know them through the udgan─like my grandmother.

Hien: Khatun, I am come to beg a boon of you and yours. That I might liberate my homeland, I seek to rally the strength of the Steppe.

Hien: To that end, I wish to fight in the Naadam─as a warrior of the Mol. Will you grant me this honor?

Cirina: To stand with the Mol is fruitless! Hien, do not do this! The gods may have willed that our tribe join in the Naadam, but…

Cirina: There is no path to victory! We are weak and our numbers few. Even with your help, it would be impossible.

Hien: I thank you for your concern, Cirina. But it is precisely because of the seeming hopelessness of your cause that we must needs cast our lot with you.

Hien: Were we to join hands with a more favored tribe, our victory would inevitably be attributed to them. And no one would follow me to Doma.

Temulun: ‘Twas the gods’ will that we fight. Mayhap this too is their design.

Temulun: Hear me, then. As khatun of the Mol, I invite you all to join with us in the Naadam.

Temulun: Will you look after them?

Cirina: Come with me, friends. There is much I would show you.

[The group heads out of the yurt. Temulun calls to the Warrior of Light.]

Temulun: You, wait. I would have words.

Temulun: A singular radiance. Shimmering. Like a jewel of the Dusk Mother, blinding in its brilliance.

Temulun: Stars flicker and flock to you. Before such gathered light, even the secrets of the gods may be laid bare.

Temulun: Some are fated to rise in grace and glory. Others to falter and fade, though not from memory. Both will be your strength and salvation come the end.

Temulun: Cherish the stars and the light they bring you in the dark. For you are a traveler, are you not?

[Clearly I need to introduce her to Urianger. They’ll get along famously.]

[Outside the yurt.]

Cirina: …Thank you all for coming, and for offering to fight with us in the Naadam. Though I still fear our chances grim, I am grateful for your assistance.

Cirina: To be recognized as warriors of the Mol, there is a trial you must overcome.

Cirina: But before we speak of such things, there is another, more pressing matter!

Cirina: My friends. I must warn you. The path upon which you embark is fraught with peril.

Cirina: You will journey unto the far reaches of the Steppe to confront a terrible foe, as did the warrior Bardam in days of yore. Three days he battled with the demon ere he returned to his people. So it is written, so must it be.

Cirina: Many who follow in his footsteps perish, lacking in strength of body and mind. Therefore…

Cirina: We must treat you to a great feast!

[The group is puzzled.]

Cirina: Have…have I said something strange? The hungry fox starves staring at the bull’s testicles, therefore warriors should be well fed on the eve of battle!

Hien: She does have a point. You have been keeping busy in my absence. A brief repast may be in order, lest we collapse of fatigue and malnourishment in the midst of our trial.

Cirina: Yes, just so! However, it will take time to prepare.

Lyse: Is there anything we can do to help? It might also give us a chance to learn more about your people and their ways.

Cirina: Well, if you insist, I am sure that the others would be glad of your assistance.

Cirina: Hmm… Would you go and speak with Dorbei, Lyse?

Cirina: As for you three─you can help me with another task.

Cirina: For today’s feast the gods decreed that we lure gulo gulo to slaughter with entrails. Perhaps you could be the ones to do this?

Gosetsu: That your people look to the gods for guidance I understand, but in your daily meals! I say, your grandmother must be quite busy.

Cirina: Some days more than others. But every night we come together around the cookfire.

Hien: Even babes must earn their keep on the Steppe. Give over the entrails, Cirina. We will bring you a bounty of meat!

[Out on the Steppes]

Hien: A word of advice. Our quarry is wont to avoid the Xaela and their settlements, but is fond of flowing waters…

Hien: Hmm. A thought occurs to me. How about we make a game of it, Auric?

Hien: I have six bags of entrails with which we may lure our gulo gulo. Three for you, and three for me.

Hien: Whoever returns with the greater portion shall be declared the winner. What say you?

Hien: Then it is settled! Gosetsu will stand as witness. Let the game begin!

[Hunting]

Hien: Ho! It would seem that, at the very least, you are the faster hunter.

Hien: But speed is not everything. For my part, I slew six gulo gulo!

Gosetsu: Aye, that you have, my lord. As for Auric…

Gosetsu: This day you are twice the hunter as he, for our friend delivered unto me but three portions─half your sum, my lord.

Hien: Oho! And there you have it. I shall try not to let it go to my head.

Hien: I know better than to expect the hawk to show his talons on a whim. Nay, when the time comes, I expect you will prove yourself more than my match.

Hien: And with that, our game is concluded. Let us return to Mol Iloh forthwith─and let us have Auric present our meat to Cirina.

Hien: Mayhap you are unfamiliar with traditional Xaela cuisine? Let not its appearance deceive you─it is quite hearty and nourishing.

Hien: Were it not so, I doubt they could have nursed me back to health. Heh heh, you should have seen the state I was in…

Cirina: You are returned, Auric. How was your hunt?

Cirina: My word, this is impressive! Or were you so hungry that you felt the need to kill so many?

Cirina: Well! I shall endeavor not to disappoint you all with my cooking!

Cirina: It will be a little while before the meal is ready. If you and Lyse wish to fill the time, perhaps you could assist Dorbei?

Cirina: He has many responsibilities, and would welcome your help. Nor would you regret making his acquaintance, for he is liked and respected by all.

Cirina: You may find him by the other yurt, taking stock of our supplies.

Dorbei: Ah. One of the newcomers. Welcome. I spoke with Lyse.

Dorbei: I bade her help the children gather fuel for the cookfires. I trust it will be a good experience for all.

Dorbei: For you too, perhaps. Seek them in the south, across the bridge.

Lyse: Oh, Auric! Are you here to help too?

Lyse: Great! So…I suppose Dorbei told you that the children and I are gathering “fuel” for the fires, did he?

Lyse: It’ll need to be dried before they can burn it, of course. You, um…you do understand what we’re here for, right? Only, some people can be a bit squeamish about this sort of stuff.

Lyse: Then again, you’ve never minded getting your hands dirty, have you? Anyway, we’re trying to get four piles each. Good luck! And keep an eye on the children while you’re at it, eh?

Lyse: Well? Have you found your share yet?

Lyse: Good work. I hope you took the time to talk to the children while you were at it.

Boisterous Mol Boy: Lyse! Lyse! Look how much dung we have!

Lyse: Wow, I’m impressed! I thought we’d gathered a lot, but it looks like we’ll have to admit defeat!

Willowy Mol Girl: Dorbei will be happy we found enough…

Bright-eyed Mol Girl: Not just Dorbei! Now we can continue making cheese! Not that I was worried─it was easier when we were living near that forest, but dung works just as well as wood.

Lyse: I heard the Mol move from place to place─that the gods tell you where to go. That must be hard on you all…

Boisterous Mol Boy: Hard? I do not understand. Why is it hard?

Boisterous Mol Boy: It is better for the animals to move─to have more food to eat and land to roam. To stay in one place is harder, no?

Reserved Mol Boy: …From the heavens comes the rain which nourishes the soil. From the soil comes the grass which nourishes the beast. From the beast comes the flesh which nourishes the Xaela. Ours is the soil of one and all.

Bright-eyed Mol Girl: But you Westerners are like the Domans─you live in the same place. In villages. And all the villages in one place are part of a “nation,” yes?

Bright-eyed Mol Girl: Hien talks about nations sometimes. When he was injured, he spoke of Doma in his sleep, but I did not understand his words.

Willowy Mol Girl: Whenever I ask him about Doma, he just smiles and looks to the south…

Willowy Mol Girl: It reminds me of my mother when she waits for my father to return from a long journey… But Hien will not wait any longer, will he? Because you came for him. To take him back…because his nation is more important…

Lyse: Um…I’m not sure how to answer this…

Lyse: A nation…is a place, I suppose. A place…and the people in it…and maybe the things, too…

Lyse: But more than that, it’s the history, the traditions, the words. The stories we tell ourselves and our children. Everything that came before and everything that comes after.

Lyse: The place we were born is part of who we are. We carry it with us, no matter where we go. Whoever…whatever we become, that part remains─that link to our fathers and their fathers before them…

Lyse: It’s…it’s not important to everyone, I suppose, and that’s fine. But it’s important to Hien. And to me.

Reserved Mol Boy: …Some call the Mol fools for listening to the elder gods, but it is our way. Our pride. Our…nation?

Lyse: Something like that. It’s something precious that you and others share─and that no one can ever take from you.

Lyse: But we can talk more about it later! It’s time to go home. Dorbei is waiting!

Lyse: I’ll stay with the children. Why not go and let Cirina know how we got on?

Cirina: Welcome back, Auric. Did you speak with Dorbei?

Cirina: Well, well! Then you will forgive me if I ask you to wash your hands. I shall pour you a cup of milk tea in the meantime.

Cirina: The meal is almost ready, so we should summon Hien and Gosetsu…

[By the cookfire, Lyse has dozed off.]

Cirina: The meal is almost ready, so we should summon Hien and Gosetsu…

Cirina: She needed the rest. To come so far and carry so much…

Cirina: Hien and his friend, too. Strange that they should vanish so soon.

[Sounds of sparring can be heard.]

Hien: Hah! Haaagh!

Gosetsu: Not troubled by your old wounds, I see.

Hien: Hm. Nor you by yours.

Hien: I know I should have fled with the others after Father died, instead of blindly fighting on.

Hien: It was reckless and foolish, and there was naught to be gained from it. Everything to lose, rather…

Gosetsu: We know no path save the one we walk. I myself am in no hurry to meet those who have gone before─not while I have still to make amends.

Hien: Well said.

Gosetsu: You are none the worse for your time in the wilderness. On the contrary, I would say you have improved.

Hien: Come now, your victories still far exceed mine. Or have you forgotten all the times you trounced me as a boy?

Gosetsu: I…feared I would not see you again.

Hien: A life so fortuitously saved should be spent wisely. Without regret would I have traded it for our people’s amnesty, had it been their will.

Hien: Instead they have called for the sword, and so that is what I must be. Until this blade is broken, I can but carve a path forward.

Hien: …Were you truly so concerned for my well-being? You never showed it when we used to spar.

Gosetsu: How you cried when you lost. And when your mother tried to comfort you. And when you inevitably came at me once more, swinging your wooden sword wildly…

Gosetsu: Mina’s little Master Shun. What a fine young man you’ve become!

Hien: A man should not be addressed by his childhood name. I’ve told you about that before!

Hien: Ah, the mask slips! And I was so close to cultivating a winning persona.

[The Warrior of Light walks up.]

Gosetsu: There will be opportunity enough for putting on airs after you have returned in triumph to Doma. Now is the time to show our true character.

[“ ‘Shun’, was it?”]

Hien: …Yes, yes, ’tis a name my parents gave me as a child─but I should like to think I have long since outgrown it!

Hien: But as you seem determined to bring it back into use, I believe a match is in order. If I win, you will be honor-bound to divulge one of your darkest secrets.

[The next day.]

Hien: Well, my friends! I for one am full of vim and vigor! I trust you feel the same?

Hien: Then what better time than now to undertake our trial, and become full-fledged warriors of the Mol!

Hien: Now then, Cirina, if you would tell us of the trial we must undertake that we might participate in the Naadam.

Cirina: Ah, yes! As I mentioned before, to be recognized as warriors of the Steppe, one must follow in the footsteps of the legendary warrior Bardam.

Cirina: He embarked on a great pilgrimage, eschewing cart and horse, and walked for many malms until he came to a holy place, thereafter named Bardam’s Mettle. There, at the altar, as he did, you must pray.

Cirina: The altar lies deep within the breeding grounds of the yol. To complete your trial, you must tame one. Only then will your trial be complete.

Hien: Fair enough. And where is the entrance to Bardam’s Mettle?

Cirina: You must journey far, far to the west─beyond Chakha Zoh, where lie the bones of a great and wise woman.

Cirina: Beyond the ruins of Ceol Aen, hidden within the mountains is a narrow pass. Follow it, and you will come to Bardam’s Mettle.

Lyse: Sounds to me like it’ll be a trial just getting to the trial…

Cirina: More than you may know. On the eve of the Naadam, many strive to improve their fortunes─some by abducting and enslaving the warriors of other tribes.

Cirina: Be ever mindful of your surroundings, lest you be taken as well.

Hien: Hah! What grim expressions you wear while nodding so powerfully! Warriors such as you are not like to fall en route to a mere rite of passage.

Hien: We shall proceed with all due caution, yes, but let us not worry overmuch.

Hien: We will overcome this trial, and the next, and the next, until we stand triumphant. That is all there is to it, no?

Hien: With me, my friends! To the west! To Bardam’s Mettle!

Cirina: W-Wait, Hien! Oh dear. I knew I would forget.

Cirina: Here─take these whistles. Once tamed, your yol will hearken to their call.

Lyse: Thanks. We’ll try them out once we’ve finished the trial.

Lyse: Let’s catch up to Hien and Gosetsu!

Lyse: We still have a long way to go, but I think I can see that monument Cirina talked about.

Lyse: I don’t see Hien or Gosetsu, though. We should hurry!

Lyse: Hey…I don’t know about you, but I can’t shake the feeling someone’s watching us.

Lyse: Cirina did warn us about tribes that kidnap warriors and make them fight for them. Something tells me we’re about to meet them…

[Jumped by three very foolish bandits. Easy fight.]

[Hien and Gosetsu have also found some bandits.]

Hien: Ah, there you are. As you can see, they left us little choice.

Hien: I gather you were forced to dispatch a few yourself? So it goes. A few less warriors to face in the Naadam, eh?

Hien: Ceol Aen is not much further. That said, I should be surprised if our would-be masters do not try to subdue us one final time…

[They do, of course, but it’s no problem.]

Hien: Right. This must be the pass that leads to Bardam’s Mettle.

Hien: They say no foreigners have overcome this trial, but, well, there is a first time for everything, no?

Hien: Nothing left but to begin, then.

Hien: To complete the trial, we must each pass through Bardam’s Mettle and tame a yol. How precisely we are to do this, I am not sure, but since countless warriors before us have succeeded, I imagine we’ll muddle through somehow…

Hien: But enough talk! We have a Naadam to win!

[Bardam’s Mettle Dungeon unlocked (Lvl 65)]

Lyse: I should’ve known you’d be the first to make it through.

 Lyse: I’m assuming you had no trouble? Good, good. I managed somehow, as you may have guessed.

Lyse: Looks like Hien and Gosetsu are still in there, though. Nothing for it but to wait, then.

Lyse: Oh, right. I’ve still got those whistles Cirina gave me.

Lyse: Here’s yours. I suppose we ought to give them a try like she said.

Lyse: Up there, look!

[A pair of huge gray flying parrots appear – yols.]

Lyse: I think that means we’ve won them over. That one there is yours, right? The other one is mine. Awww…

Lyse: So that’s that, then! We’re officially warriors of the Steppe!

Lyse: You don’t think they…no, of course not. Hien and Gosetsu will come out any minute now.

Lyse: I suppose we could chat a little while we wait… Oh! So the other day, I said to Alisaie, I said…

[Time passes. Finally Hien and Gosetsu emerge.]

Lyse: Mission accomplished! Everything still in one piece?

Hien: More or less, aye. That mountainous monstrosity came as quite a surprise. Who knew that the Steppe held such secrets!

Gosetsu: I see the two of you emerged similarly unscathed. Well, then! By my reckoning, there is naught left to prevent us from taking part in the Naadam!

[Footsteps sound and about a dozen Au Ri fighters run up. The leader is one of the two Au Ri who were arguing in the market.]

Impetuous Warrior: You! Yea, you who have walked Bardam’s Mettle. Newborn warriors of the Steppe. Our khan demands an audience. You will come.

Lyse: I remember those clothes. He’s Oronir, isn’t he? What should we do?

Hien: Ordinarily, I would politely decline. But this may be an opportunity to assess their strength, and we do have some time before the Naadam begins…

Hien: If all goes to plan, they will be fighting for us soon enough. What say you? Shall we go and greet our comrades-to-be?

[“Why not?”]

Lyse: Whatever happens, we shouldn’t keep Cirina and the others waiting.

Let’s be ready to make a swift exit, all right?

Hien: We accept your khan’s generous invitation. Lead the way.

[We are led off to the meeting place.]

Lyse: Two banners… So it’s not just Oronir we’re dealing with…

[We go inside. We are brought before the leader of the Oronir.]

Impetuous Warrior: Most radiant brother Magnai. We have brought the ones you seek.

Magnai: You conquered Bardam’s Mettle.

Hien: As warriors of the Mol, aye. You are the khan here, yes? Why have you summoned us? Mayhap to propose a joint endeavor?

Magnai: Nay, Doman. We shall not speak as equals. Born of the Sun are Oronir, and born of the earth are you.

Magnai: When I learned of trespassers, I bade my warriors take their measure.To flay them if they failed.

Magnai: But if by the grace of Azim they should survive their trials and emerge anointed, then bring them hither to pay tribute.

 Magnai: Tribute, should it prove satisfactory, shall earn you the favor of the Sun. His beloved shall bask in His radiance, and their supplications be duly considered.

Lyse: So you want us to bow down and serve you. What if we don’t feel like it?

Magnai: The defiant will suffer in shadow. It would be an affront to the resplendent Azim Himself to refuse this generous offer when by rights you should be condemned. But, in lieu of tribute…

Magnai: Swear fealty to the Sun. Pledge to Him your body and soul. Promise to serve Him unto death, and you may know His glory.

Magnai: A generous offer granted to but few…though perchance this is too merciful.

[Another Au Ra male – Daidukul — says something to the Oronir leader that we can’t hear.]

Magnai: Hm. It seems our brothers of the Buduga want you.

Magnai: The men only.

Magnai: Like the Borlaaq and women─though you know them not either, I am sure. No matter. All you need know is that you will serve, one way or another.

Hien: That much does indeed seem plain. However, as we are but newborn warriors who know little of your customs, we struggle to conceive of ways in which we might be of service to the most gracious and illustrious Sun.

[The leader seems infuriated by this.]

Magnai: You make mock of us, Doman. Do not do so again.

[His bad temper makes our group frown.]

Magnai: You will be given a task. It will be difficult. You will carry it out. When you have accepted this, you may ask me what it is.

[Sure, whatever. Jerk.]

Magnai: So you are the first to step forward. Hmm. Bold…or reckless. I see why Daidukul favors you.

Magnai: The Naadam approaches, and the Oronir will reign supreme once more. Such is the will of Father Azim.

Magnai: Yet only fools think to triumph by the grace of the gods alone─and we are not fools.

Magnai: Your task will be to aid us in our preparations. Baatu will tell you the rest.

[Baatu is the Au Ra formerly known as “Impetuous Warrior.”]

Baatu: Warriors of the Steppe! By the grace of our most radiant brother, you will not die this day, but instead be granted an opportunity to contribute to our cause.

Lyse: Question! You keep calling Magnai your “most radiant brother.” You’re not related or something, are you?

Baatu: …All Oronir are descendants of Father Azim. But if you mean to ask if our mothers are one and the same, then no. The most radiant is the elder brother to we younger─the strongest and most deserving of respect.

Baatu: No more interruptions! Your duties are as follows.

Baatu: You, the red woman. You will milk our beasts. To grow strong, one must be well fed, and we have great need of kumis and cheese.

Lyse: …Is that it? I mean, I’m not happy about all this, but I suppose I can go along for now.

Baatu: You, the one who lumbers as a mountain… Hm. An old warrior, I see. We have arms and armor in need of repair. Go and speak with our menders.

Gosetsu: I have no talent for delicate work, but if that is your wish, then so be it.

Baatu: You, the insolent fool. As for you─

Daidukul: This one carries the fire. The Buduga would take his measure.

Daidukul: Seek my comrade outside tending to the stores. He will give you your task. You will know him by his cloth─unlike they of the yellow, we are of the green.

Hien: I, for one, would welcome the opportunity to learn more of the Buduga and their ways. It would be an honor!

[Baatu turns to the Warrior of Light]

Baatu: …We shall speak of your task outside. With me.

[Outside]

Baatu: Your name, foreigner?

Baatu: …Auric, then. You are to dive into Azim Khaat, below the Dawn Throne, and gather swordgrass from the lakebed.

Baatu: It is an invaluable ingredient in many medicines. Eight bundles will you bring.

Baatu: You will need to dive deep to obtain that which you seek…but that shall pose no trouble for a true warrior, no?

Baatu: Some say that the dominion of the Dawn Father and the Dusk Mother does not extend beneath the water. But ours does. Indeed, the Oronir fear naught above nor below.

Baatu: Speak with the guard to descend. We shall speak again when you have finished.

Oroniri Spearson: Yes, yes, I know who you are. You wish to go below?

[SPLASH! Again.]

Baatu: He returns, and with swordgrass in hand?

Baatu: …That you would immerse yourself in the depths is a testament to your bravery. Well done.

Baatu: Lest you wonder, we will use it to prepare potions to induce paralysis. In the Naadam, we must use every means at our disposal to delay our foes.

Baatu: He who inscribes his deeds upon the sacred ground shall be declared the victor. However, none may know this place until the Gharl have scattered the soil.

Baatu: It matters not. We shall be swift as stallions and fierce as baras. The Steppe will be ours once more!

Baatu: Your tribute is accepted. We will return to the most radiant, and you may beg a boon.

[In the leader’s chamber]

Magnai: …Am I to understand you have completed your tasks?

Hien: I know not what yours was, but mine was surprisingly simple.

Hien: They bade me carry various goods and sundries from storehouse to storehouse. Alas, it was difficult to learn much with all the Buduga swarming around me…

Magnai: You dove deep into the waters to harvest swordgrass? I see. That is well.

Hien: Most radiant brother Magnai, we have given you tribute, as demanded. Were we to beg leave to depart with our comrades, would you consent?

Magnai: We never intended to press you into our service, and tribute offered in good faith cannot be denied. To grant you naught in return would be an affront to Father Azim.

Magnai: However, the boon must be proportional to the supplications. What you ask far exceeds what you have earned.

[Hien seems to be thinking.]

Hien: …Then if we must remain here, would you at least permit us to learn more of your people and your ways?

[The Warrior of Light looks puzzled.]

Hien: Temulun Khatun taught me but a fraction, you see…

Hien: How this world born of the gods was to be their battlefield, their creations to fight in their stead.

Hien: How Azim, Father of the Dawn, he who birthed the sun, and Nhaama, Mother of the Dusk, she who birthed the moon, made the Au Ra…

Hien: Yet though these children warred for a time, eventually they laid down their arms and came to love one another. And so the gods bequeathed this world to their children, and ascended to the heavens whence they came.

Hien: Those born of the Dawn Father were called the Raen, and those born of the Dusk Mother were called the Xaela. So it was and ever after.

Hien: But I say to you, Brother Magnai─how can this be? How can Oronir be the children of Azim, if they are Xaela born of Nhaama?

Magnai: …You amuse me, Doman. How you wield your ignorance as a weapon.

Magnai: Very well. I bid you speak with our elders and learn the truth of this world.

[Hien speaks to the Warrior of Light]

Hien: …I know what you’re thinking. And yes, I could probably have convinced him to let us go had I handled that differently. But then we would have learned naught for our troubles.

Hien: If there is one thing I know, it is that men of faith yearn to share it with others. And in learning more of their beliefs, we may learn more of other things─things which may prove useful in the Naadam.

Hien: When I was carrying out my tasks, I met an elder─a storyteller─named Udutai. Mayhap he can be our teacher.

[Udutai is preoccupied.]

Udutai: Hm? I can spare no time for you. Other troubles demand my attention.

Hien: What troubles? What ill fortune has befallen you?

Udutai: Not me, but my lambs. Some few wandered far and have yet to return.

Udutai: Mayhap they will return to their mothers in time. Mayhap they will not. Mayhap you can help?

Hien: If we must, then we must. Let us be about it, Auric.

[Lambs found!]

Hien: Greetings. I trust all of our little explorers are safely accounted for?

Udutai: That they are. My thanks to you, Doman. Now─you had questions for me?

Hien: Aye. I would know more of the Oronir─of their creation, and of Father Azim.

Udutai: As you wish. Come, let us sit.

Udutai: Before we begin, tell me:   what do you know of the Au Ra, and how they came to be?

[“In the days before men, Azim and Nhaama waged a bitter war…”]

Udutai: Yes, yes. A common tale, and one believed by many tribes.

Udutai: But what it does not mention is this: Azim and Nhaama were lovers.

Udutai: Oh, they fought in the beginning, as did their creations. That much is true. But when they saw how the Xaela and the Raen rose above their hatreds and joined hands in harmony, their hearts stirred, and the love their children shared became theirs as well.

Udutai: Alas, he was of the sun and she of the moon. Apart they must remain, lest day and night cease to be, and with them all creation.

Udutai: With sadness in their hearts they returned to the heavens─he to the day, she to the night, destined to walk before and after, never to meet.

Udutai: As time passed, Azim’s yearning for his beloved grew deeper still. Was there truly naught that could be done, he wondered. At last, he knew.

Udutai: “If the Father cannot be with the Mother, then he shall go amongst her children. Now and ever after.“

Udutai: So it was that Azim took a fragment of his being and with it fashioned an avatar. Clad in scale of midnight, he descended, and sought out the Xaela.

Udutai: Yea, he was the first Oronir. We are of his flesh and his blood. We are the children of Azim, and it is our duty to watch over and keep the Xaela safe.

Hien: …I confess, I did not expect the tale of your people’s beginnings to be quite so romantic.

Hien: Yet I must ask:  if it is your duty to defend the Xaela, how can you go to war with them in the Naadam? Is that not a contradiction?

Udutai: If a father disciplines his son, does that mean there is no love in his heart? Xaela are not wont to kneel. They must be made to─only then will they heed reason.

Hien: I see… Such is the way of the Steppe.

Hien: Thank you, elder, for sharing with us your wisdom.

Udutai: Eager to depart? Ere you go, you would do well to hear the end of my tale.

Udutai: When Nhaama looked down and saw the avatar of Azim, she knew him at once, and shed tears of love and longing.

Udutai: When they struck the earth, they rose anew, as a counterpart to the Oronir. Their fates entwined.

Udutai: So you see, for every son of Azim is a daughter of Nhaama for whom he must search. Even now.

Hien: Mayhap I am being overly optimistic, but I sense that these Oronir may prove loyal allies to Doma under the right circumstances.

Hien: Their arrogance is rooted in the belief that they must act as caretakers of all Xaela. Therefore, if we can prove to them that we come as kindred spirits, seeking to defeat a common foe…

Hien: But mayhap this is a discussion for after we win the Naadam. Come, let us return to Magnai.

Magnai: Hmm…you shine with the light of newfound wisdom. Could it be that you have at last accepted the supremacy of the Sun?

Magnai: No matter. You have each completed your tasks, and proven yourselves deserving of mercy.

Magnai: However, if it is freedom you desire, then there is one more thing you must do…

Magnai: …A pity you will not pledge yourselves to the Sun. You might have proved useful in the coming Naadam.

Magnai: Nevertheless, I will permit you to return and fight for the Mol. Their cause is futile, with or without your assistance. However, you must first complete a final task, as was my decree.

Magnai: You will reconnoiter the encampment of the Dotharl.

Magnai: For this task, two will go, and two will remain.

Magnai: Should the two who embark upon this expedition choose to flee, or be captured or killed by the Dotharl, then the others will be taken as slaves and serve the Sun unto death.

Lyse: We’d better not fail then, eh? The question is, who should we send?

Magnai: That is not for you to decide.

Magnai: All of you have conquered Bardam’s Mettle and proven yourselves warriors of the Steppe. You should all be equally capable of carrying out this task, and therefore, you should have no objections.

Magnai: The first choice of hostage shall be mine─though it is hardly a choice, given the circumstances.

Magnai: The red woman will remain. Doubtless you are not the moon I seek, but stranger tales have been told─and the men are of no use to me.

Magnai: You may have your pick of the men.

Daidukul: Hmm… Yes…yes…

[Daidukul studies Gosetsu, Hien, and the Warrior of Light]

[“What are you looking at?”]

Daidukul: The firewalker! Yes, this Doman is my choice.

Hien: Hah hah! I don’t know whether to be flattered or insulted. Mayhap both.

Hien: I had hoped to see these undying ones for myself, but it seems it was not meant to be.

Hien: I know you will be fine, but permit me to wish you luck all the same.

Gosetsu: We will return soon, my lord. But, if the kami are unkind, and we fail in our mission, then do what you must to survive. For Doma.

Magnai: Dotharl Khaa lies far to the south, where the grass turns to sand.

Magnai: Return with valuable knowledge, and all will be free to rejoin the Mol. Now go.

Gosetsu: Have no fear, my friend. We shall see them freed soon enough. Let us quit this place and speak of our plans outside.

[Outside]

Gosetsu: ‘Tis plain they hope we will never return. I shall enjoy disappointing them.

Gosetsu: According to my map, there is a colossal wreck to the south which should provide a vantage point from which to survey Dotharl Khaa from afar. Let us go and do just that.

[Down south at the scouting point. Gosetsu is peering out at the targets. You join him.]

Gosetsu: I spy tents to the west─theirs, I presume. What do you see?

[You immediately spot two Au Ri men under attack by large hairy creatures.]

 Gosetsu: Over there, look! Those men are in danger!

Gosetsu: Gah! Too late for the one, perhaps, but there is yet time to save the other.

Gosetsu: Come! We cannot abandon him to his fate!

Gosetsu: These ones are mine! Go! Help the man!

[On it!]

Wounded Hunter: <cough> <wheeze> I…I owe you my life.

Gosetsu: Nay, friend, think nothing of it. I but wish we had come sooner…

Gosetsu: I knew at once he was dead. It will come as scant comfort, I fear, but I slew the beasts responsible.

Wounded Hunter: Nay… That is no way for a Dotharl to die.

???: What is this? Who are these outsiders?

[The newcomer is a white-haired Xaela woman]

Wounded Hunter: Sadu Khatun! Forgive me. We were returning from our hunt when we were caught unawares by manzasiri.

Wounded Hunter: These ones saved me, but Geser is…

Sadu: Who are you? Why have you come? Not to cross the sands, that much is certain.

Sadu: I have heard tales of travelers in league with another tribe. Are you they? Who do you serve? Answer me.

 Gosetsu: If I may begin to answer your questions before you ask more…we are friends of the Mol, and we are come to see the strength of the Dotharl for ourselves.

 Sadu: The Mol? The little lambs who wander to and fro at the behest of their gods?

 Sadu: Bwahahaha! What fools you are to share the soil of such weaklings! Next you will tell me you wish to fight in the Naadam!

Sadu: Ah…so you do. Hah! That is unexpected…yet not unwelcome.

Sadu: I am Sadu. Khatun of the Dotharl. For your deeds, I grant you leave to walk among us. Come. Look on our glory and despair.

Sadu: We fear no tribe─least of all the Mol. Though, if you were of the Oronir, I would burn the flesh from your bones here and now.

Sadu: You can stand, yes? See to the corpse.

 Wounded Hunter: Y-Yes, Khatun!

Gosetsu: So that is the leader of the Dotharl. Clearly not a woman to be crossed.

Gosetsu: But how callously she spoke of her dead! “See to the corpse”? Surely this warrior deserves better than that…

Gosetsu: Forgive me, Auric, but I cannot in good conscience ignore the callous disregard that woman showed for her kinsman!

Gosetsu: We must seek her out at once! With me!

[Sadu is speaking to one of her tribesfolk.]

Sadu: How he died matters not. Geser was a great warrior. He will return to us in time.

Shar: Not soon enough, Khatun. The Naadam is nearly upon us! Mayhap we should counsel restraint until after…

[Gosetsu butts in.]

Gosetsu: I do not understand. If Geser is dead, how should he “return”?

Sadu: Silence. You come to spy on us knowing naught of our ways?

Gosetsu: We know you are fearless. And that you are called the “undying ones”…

Sadu: That is true. None are braver than the Dotharl, for we do not fear death.

Sadu: With death a warrior must dance boldly. Fearlessly. For thus does his soul burn bright.

Sadu: Then, in death, his soul shines white─exalted. The flesh rots, but the soul endures. And ere the seasons have turned, so he shall return.

Sadu: When he is glimpsed in the eyes of a newborn, he is blessed with the same name, that he may grow into a great warrior once more.

Gosetsu: You mean to tell me these newborn babes and fallen warriors are one and the same? Madness!

[Not a good thing to say.  The entire tribe looks pissed.]

Sadu: I gave you leave to observe. Not to insult our beliefs.

Sadu: Have care what you say. Otherwise, do as you will.

[Gosetsu gets that he messed up.]

Gosetsu: Such contempt as was in their eyes I have never known… But for the soul to live on as they say is not something I can so easily accept.

Gosetsu: Do they truly believe this? All of them? That in death there can be rebirth? …Retribution?

Gosetsu: …In any event, we came here in search of information. We cannot leave without speaking with her people.

[Talking to the Undying]

Koko: I know you! Reunion! The travelers with the Mol girl!

Koko: I marked you after I left the Oronir. Ones from Doma, others I could not place.

Koko: My name is Koko. Welcome to Dotharl Khaa.

Koko: Hm? Koko sounds to your ear the name of a woman? Well, of course. That would be because it is.

Koko: I died a woman and was reborn a man. It is of no moment─the soul is the soul, and the flesh the flesh.

Koko: Perhaps you scoff? Many would. Many look only to the name and the flesh, and let these things dictate their perceptions.

Koko: Consider Sadu Khatun. Three times before she died a man, yet she returns as a woman the fourth. Yet she is no less fierce, and any outsider foolish enough to think so will learn the truth to their peril.

Qoyar: The cycle of death and rebirth? It is simply that. Take me─I died in battle with the Hotgo. Fiercely did I fight, and so I returned.

Qoyar: Alas, we know naught of our past lives. I must learn what it means to be Qoyar again and again. It is difficult to remember everything, but important.

[There’s a dead hyena-like critter on the ground.]

Mergen: Impressive, is it not? ‘Twas slain by my boy.

Mergen: We were childhood friends, he and I, before he fell and returned. A master of the bow. It is good to see that he retains his skill.

[Back to Gosetsu]

Gosetsu: Ah, Auric. You have completed your enquiries?

Gosetsu: Aye, it is as she said. They believe with every fiber of their being that their bravest warriors will be reborn.

Gosetsu: As for me, I observed some of their warriors at practice. They are as formidable as the Oronir, perhaps more, and their weapons are their equal as well.

Gosetsu: Yet while they do not lack in skill and resources, ’tis plain to see that their numbers are inferior…

Gosetsu: This has been an educational experience, to say the least…

Gosetsu: Yet everything we have learned is common knowledge to the people of the Steppe. ‘Twill not be enough to earn our comrades their freedom.

Gosetsu: Naught less than the Dotharl’s plans for the Naadam will suffice, I fear.

Gosetsu: Well, I have never been one for skulking about. I will go to Sadu and see what secrets I can prise from her lips!

Sadu: The spies return. And they have learned naught.

Gosetsu: Mayhap so, but no longer! Though you hide it well, I know you have devised some manner of cunning stratagem for the Naadam! Out with it, I say!

Sadu: We are what you see, Doman. We are Dotharl.

Sadu: Other rely on tricks and traps. Subterfuge. Lies. We have need of naught but our own strength. We meet the enemy in battle and kill him.

Sadu: That is why I cared not what you did from the first. There is naught for you to learn. Tell your masters to meet us on the field, and make ready to ride with their ancestors.

Gosetsu: …Your confidence is plain, as is your strength.

Gosetsu: Yet you are not the most prosperous of tribes. The Mol you mock are few, but so too are you. Why?

[Sadu looks down.]

Sadu: …Though a glorious death is to be celebrated, it is yet death.

Sadu: While we kill many, many are killed in turn. In the wake of our battles, the soil drinks deep of the blood of the fallen, their bodies piled high.

Sadu: Not all are born again. Only the bravest. Yet one cannot return unless there is a vessel to inherit the soul, and if warriors die ere they birth children, then that is that.

Sadu: Even the brave warrior who finds a vessel will for many years remain a shadow of his former self. It falls to his elders to endure until he is ready to accept his responsibilities.

Sadu: Ever will we meet our enemies in battle without fear. Such is our way, even when our numbers dwindle. If we die, so be it─but know that we fight to live, not to die.

Sadu: Dotharl train and make ready for the day─but they do not rush to meet it. Not until we have done our duty.

Wounded Hunter: Sadu Khatun. Geser’s body has been given to the sands.

Sadu: Then our part is done. Rest, warrior. The Naadam draws near, and you will need your strength.

Sadu: If you intend to fight in the Naadam, you should return to the Mol and make ready. But know that when next we meet, you and yours will die. …Or you could fight for us and live. Think on it, travelers.

Gosetsu: …We shall. But if you would permit me a final question ere we part…where is this place that Geser has been lain to rest?

Gosetsu: Though I knew him not, I was there at his end. I wish to say a few words.

Sadu: Rites for the flesh? I have heard of this. Madness, I say, for his body is of the earth now. He will not hear you.

Sadu: But you may speak to the sands, if that is your will. They lie to the west. Make haste, for the gedan may already have caught his scent.

Gosetsu: My apologies, Auric. This will take but a moment.

[You join Gosetsu by Geser’s corpse, although you have to fight off a few hyenas first.]

Gosetsu: Left for the vultures… It seems an insult to the man.

Gosetsu: But the soul lives on, they say…these bodies no more than empty husks returning to the earth. Seen through those eyes, I suppose the sight is almost comforting.

Gosetsu: Pardon me.

Gosetsu: When first I heard the tales, I could not help but scoff. “Another queer tribe,” I thought, “with still queerer customs.” Yet having borne witness to their rites, I cannot deny there is a certain logic to it all.

Gosetsu: A samurai will die for his lord without hesitation or regret. But this is not because he delights in such sacrifice.

Gosetsu: It is because he has faith that his death will serve a higher purpose. There is an awakening in that instant, when the heart sings and the blood burns, and his soul…his soul finds peace.

Gosetsu: There is comfort in that…

[A few more hyenas make a play for the corpse. Gosetsu chases them off.]

Gosetsu: Nay, we dare not permit ourselves that luxury, my friend, tempting though it may be. Not while our loved ones yet remain in chains!

Gosetsu: Well, then. We must all be on our way─even Geser.

Gosetsu: Let us return to the Dawn Throne, and pray that our tale is enough to satisfy our “most radiant” taskmaster.

[Meanwhile, deep within the Dawn Throne….]

[Lyse and Hien are locked in a cell together.]

Lyse: Well, if there is a way out, I can’t see it. Shame we didn’t learn much before they locked us up…

Hien: ‘Tis little wonder the Oronir won the last Naadam. These people leave naught to chance.

Lyse: Hien…I’ve had something on my mind for a while, and now…

Lyse: In Ala Mhigo, where I was born, I found it strange that for all the people who supported the Resistance, there were just as many who didn’t.

Lyse: But then we came to this part of the world, and met with the Confederacy and lots of ordinary Domans, and almost every single one of them seemed content to just put up with things, no matter how bad they got.

Lyse: They─they all had their reasons, of course, and it’s not like I don’t understand them, but…the thought of it made me so angry. After everything they’d been through, everything the Empire had done to them, how could they not rise up? How could they not fight back?

 Hien: …People are pragmatic creatures at heart.

 Hien: They hold on to hope only until they taste true hardship. Then comes fear and regret. Safer not to dream, they conclude at last.

Hien: For even should a day go by without some new disappointment, the next will only bring more of the same. And so they choose the more sensible option…

Hien: They learn to abide the indignities and injustices, the pain and the shame─to accept them as normal. Such is the lot of most men. One cannot expect to spur them to action at a moment’s notice.

Hien: But if one who has known their pain can convince them to strive for something greater, and rekindle the fire in their hearts…then they will remember what they have lost. And they will rise.

Lyse: I had someone like that once. I didn’t know who I was or who I wanted to be, and…he risked his life to show me the way.

[Lyse rests her hand on her neck where her false Circle of Knowing tattoo used to be.]

Hien: Then honor him by doing the same for others─with all your might and main!

Hien: You know, when my homeland fell twenty-five years past, I was still in my mother’s womb. Never have I known a free Doma!

Hien: But my father did, as did many of my fallen comrades. As do many of my people now.

Hien: It may be no more than a dream to me, but if I do not chase it, then who will?

Lyse: …The way you carry it all. You’re just the same.

Hien: Hm? …As you?

Lyse: Oh, no, not me! Definitely not me. I meant the Warrior of Light. Out there, somewhere, doing what needs to be done…

Lyse: I won’t have you put me to shame any longer… I’m going to seize the future I want with my own two hands!

[Back at the corpse in the sands]

Gosetsu: You are ready to depart, I trust? Good. Then let us away.

[Back at the Dawn Throne]

Baatu: Welcome, travelers. The most radiant brother will hear your tale.

Magnai: All that you have seen and heard. Your knowledge. I would have it.

Magnai: …No secret stratagems, you say. That is well. I expected as much.

Magnai: The Dotharl are not schemers. They live only for war─for the contest of strength and will. They are fierce, aye, and to face one is to court death.

Gosetsu: “Meet us on the field, and make ready to ride with your ancestors.“ Such were the words of their khatun, Sadu.

Baatu: Speak not that devil’s name in the presence of the most radiant!

Gosetsu: You bade us tell you of the Dotharl, yet you will not hear the name of their leader?

Baatu: After the last Naadam, she gave great offense.

Baatu: The most radiant brother called to him the women of the Steppe, that he might look into their eyes and see if Nhaama looked back.

Baatu: But that gedan, that feral udgan! She spat curses and called forth flames! She scorched the soil and refused to present herself!

Baatu: Three days and nights had we fought to claim the Dawn Throne, and still she shows Brother Magnai such disrespect! Such defiance! By rights should she pay with her life!

Magnai: Speak not another word, Baatu, or you will pay with yours.

Magnai: Her words are air, as the Domans say. However, they are proof of your service to the Sun.

Magnai: Go and fetch the others from their cells.

[Baatu does as he’s told.]

Gosetsu: My lord, Lyse, you are unharmed?

Hien: Thanks to you and Auric. We are free to return to Mol Iloh, I take it?

Magnai: By your deeds have you proven yourselves to be warriors brave and true.

Magnai: You may return to the Mol and make ready for the Naadam…on one condition.

Magnai: To fight in the Naadam is to be bound by it. Swear, here and now, to abide by the law of the Steppe. To accept the supreme authority of the khagan, whomsoever it may be.

All: We swear!

[Outside]

Hien: Well done, my friends. I knew you would not fail.

Hien: I should be glad to hear of your experiences with the Dotharl, but as time is of the essence, let us converse en route.

Hien: Come, come─Cirina and the others are waiting!

[Off to Mol Iloh]

Cirina: Thank the gods you are all right! When you failed to return, I feared the worst.

 Cirina: But here you are, hale and whole! And you survived Bardam’s Mettle!

Cirina: Blessed are we to have you as allies. With your strength, we may have a chance…

Cirina: My friends. We are come to the final day of the Tsagaan Sar. To the Naadam.

Cirina: The battle will commence with the rising of the sun. The Gharl will scatter the soil, and the Steppe will be unbound.

Cirina: A great ovoo will erupt from the earth and call for a new khagan. All will converge upon the light, and the warrior who claims it will win the day.

Cirina: Precious little time remains. Pray use it to prepare for the battle.

Temulun: Many of the young ones have never taken part in a Naadam. They are nervous. Perhaps you might favor them with some few words? It would do much to ease their fears…

[Sure, why not.]

Bujeg: At the behest of the khatun you speak with us, yes? You are kind to do so, and I am grateful.

Bujeg: Do not underestimate the power of words. A warrior conquers one with his hands, but a thousand with his head. Even you cannot fight forever.

Cotan: When we were young, my friends and I could scarcely wait to challenge Bardam’s Mettle. We longed to become warriors…

Cotan: The day came and went, but we rarely fought men. Mostly beasts. And now we must stand against the Oronir and the Dotharl. You have seen them─taken the measure of them. Do you believe we can win?

[“You can and will. Have faith!”]

Cotan: Yes…yes! ‘Twas the gods’ will that we fight. Surely it is their will that we win! Of course!

Dorbei: Ah, it is you. The one who helped the children with their chores. For that I must thank you.

Dorbei: Though mayhap I will repay the favor in battle. Yes, I too will fight in the Naadam, though you may not see me. While you and yours contest the ovoo, my comrades and I will devote our efforts to preventing other tribes from interfering.

Dorbei: We are few, and we are weak, but we shall do what we can to aid you. Go well, traveler, and if it be the gods’ will, let us speak again when the day is done.

Diligent Mol Warrior: How strange this feeling… The thrill before battle… A battle in which I may die.

[“We will fight, we will win, and we will return to Moh Iloh together.”]

Diligent Mol Warrior: Yes…yes of course we will! I must have faith! I must have courage!

Diligent Mol Warrior: I have not always understood the motives of the gods, but I have accepted their guidance ever since I was a child. If they would have us fight, I must believe they have their reasons.

Diligent Mol Warrior: So I shall fight with all my might! And if it is the gods’ will, then we shall win!

 

Temulun: Already, I sense a change in the people. Their hearts soothed, their resolve strengthened. This we owe to you.

Temulun: We are of the soil. The wind and the water. We are not conquerors.

Temulun: But we are yet the children of Nhaama─we are yet Xaela. We were made for battle─to kill and be killed. We delight not in such things, but let no man doubt that they are in our nature.

Temulun: Flesh, blood, bone─that which was given, we offer unto the gods as tribute. This day we embrace death. Ours and our enemies’.

Temulun: So too must you embrace this truth, for this is who we are. Who you are become, as warriors of the Steppe.

Temulun: May the gods guide you to victory.

Cirina: All that remains is to wait for daybreak!

[Duty – Nadaam]

Cirina: You are ready for battle, Auric?

[In the sky, Magnai flies on his yol, watching the preparations for the Nadaam.]

Magnai: I see you, soil bearers…

[Four robed Au Ri carry a large urn out onto the steppe and empty the contents. A beam of shimmering light appears at that spot.]

[Sadu is watching with her tribe.]

Sadu: The soil has been scattered, and the Steppe reborn! Sanctified and unbound, she calls for a new khagan!

Sadu: Go forth and claim her, Dotharl, and bring death to all who bar your way!

[In Mol Iloh, Cirina and Temulun are also watching.]

Cirina: It begins, Grandmother.

[Temulun nods and points to the beam of light. Our group also takes note.]

Hien: I must say, it’s been a while… Is everyone ready?

Gosetsu: Hah hah hah! A samurai is always ready. You shall remember this soon enough once I have taken to the field.

Lyse: So we take on all comers, and then it’s off to Doma! I can’t wait!

Cirina: Thank you, my friends. Upon the soil of one and all shall our deeds be inscribed…

[To triumph in the Naadam, you and your allies must race from Mol Iloh towards the ovoo in the distance, while fending off attacks from other tribes.

Once you arrive at the ovoo, you must claim it for the Mol. But be warned that the warriors of other tribes can do so as well, and only the first will be crowned khagan.

Prevent your opponents from claiming the ovoo and endure their assault to win the Naadam for the Mol!]

Cirina: Grant us favor, O Mother of the Dusk, and to victory guide the Mol!

 Cirina of the Laughing Reeds: The ovoo lies to the south! I will lead the way!

Budugan Hunter: Warriors of the Mol! You will go no further!

Hien: That didn’t take long. Weapons!

[FIGHT!]

 Gosetsu Everfall: I will deal with this rabble, my lord! Make for the ovoo!

Hien: My thanks, Gosetsu! Forward, brothers and sisters!

 Lyse: Gosetsu had the right idea! I’ll keep them busy─the rest of you, keep moving!

Cirina of the Laughing Reeds: Thank you, Lyse! With me, Hien, Auric!

[FIGHT SOME MORE!]

Cirina of the Laughing Reeds: There it is! The ovoo! We are not too late!

Hien: The fighting is most fierce! No matter─charge!

[FIGHTY FIGHT FIGHT!]

 Hien: They falter! Now, Auric─claim the ovoo!

[Sure, no problem.]

[Oops, Magnai just used Holmgang or something to drag me off the goal.]

 

Magnai the Older: What folly is this? Who dares to challenge the Sun?

Magnai: You came, as I knew you would. For you too are a warrior of the Steppe.

Magnai: I salute you, traveler, and should be honored to face you alone…but the Dotharl thirst for blood and will suffer no duels.

[Here come the Dotharl.]

 Magnai: Bear witness, Father Azim! The soil shall drink deep of blood this day!

Hien: The most radiant brother has arrived! A pity…

Magnai the Older: Rise, brothers of the Sun!

Cirina of the Laughing Reeds: An opening! Defend me, my friends!

Magnai the Older: Know your place!

Magnai the Older: The battle has only begun, child! You will not deprive me of my pleasure!

[Here’s Sadu’s group. She’s a black mage.]

Sadu Heavensflame: Hearken to the chaos, brothers!

Magnai the Older: Lo, the mad udgan comes!

Hien: Still alive, Auric? Good! If we want to claim the ovoo, we’ll need to deal with those two first!

 Sadu Heavensflame: In death do our souls sing!

[Sadu cheats by summoning a couple of stone obelisks that render her invulnerable.]

 Lyse: I don’t like the looks of those giant stone thingies!

[Fortunately they’re not hard to kill. ]

Sadu Heavensflame: Hmph. How dare you…

[During this fight the point is to interact with the target – the ovoo – without getting interrupted. 

 Occasionally members of the various tribes will try to use the ovoo and you have to drive them away.

Meanwhile your own NPC friends are failing to take the target despite it being wide open several times. TYPICAL.]

Gosetsu Everfall: Well done, well done! Victory is within our reach!

 Hien: The ovoo, Auric! Claim it! Claim it now!

Cirina of the Laughing Reeds: Defend the ovoo! Let none pass!

[Got it!]

Sadu: The Steppe has spoken!? Then the khagan is…

Cirina: We have won… The Mol have won! The Dawn Throne is ours!

Hien: We did it… And you, my friend…you…you were magnificent. Magnificent…and, uh…not a little terrifying.

Sadu: What a strange tale this is become. To think I suffered them to live…

Magnai: On your guard, udgan. The wind warns of men in iron.

[What the HELL are Grynewaht and his goon squad doing here??]

Grynewaht: Hah-hah! I thought I’d find you here, Eorzean! Dearest of all my enemies!

Grynewaht: Today’s the day I finally get to kill you! And then they’ll give me a shiny medal, and my choice of posting! Bloody perfect, it is!

Grynewaht: Well, go on, then! Kill him! Kill ’em all!

Hien: Dearest of all his enemies, eh? Congratulations.

Hien: Hearken to me, honored warriors of the Steppe! Our enemies intrude upon this sacred ground! Have you yet the strength to oppose them!?

Sadu: You forget to whom you speak, Doman. We are the undying ones. We are Dotharl.

Magnai: If this be the will of the Mol and their khagan, so be it. The Sun shall abide by the law of the Steppe.

[“Warriors of the Steppe – with me!”]

Cirina of the Laughing Reeds: Drive the ironmen from our lands! The khagan wills it!

Hien: Such fortuitous timing you have to face a Steppe united!

Lyse: Now this is more like it! All the imperials I can punch!

Hien: That’s the spirit! Let’s not let her put us to shame!

Gosetsu Everfall: Never did the thought cross my mind, my lord!

 Cirina of the Laughing Reeds: Hold fast, warriors of the Steppe! We can defeat them!

Sadu Heavensflame: Let naught be left in our wake!

[Sadu summons her two stone guardians again and stars casting a channeled spell.]

Grynewaht: I don’t like the looks of those giant stone thingies! Get rid of them─now!

Magnai the Older: Oh, if I must… The Sun claims these ironmen!

 Hien: Aid the khatun! She must finish her spell!

[Sadu finishes and Flares the crap out of the Imperials.]

Grynewaht: Bugger, bugger, bugger!

Grynewaht: But I had you, I had you!

[Not even close, Grynnie old boy.]

Grynewaht: Impossible! He was there for the taking! What do I have to do!?

Grynewaht: I need more men…more weapons…more power!

Grynewaht: Graaaaaah!

[Grynewaht flees.]

Lyse: As if we’d lose to the likes of him! And we’re only gonna get stronger. Stronger and stronger until we’re strong enough to take back everything they stole!

Hien: I have kept my promise, Cirina. They are yours to command.

Cirina: Oh! Yes, of course!

Cirina: Brothers and sisters of the Steppe! The Naadam is ended, and we Mol now claim the Dawn Throne.

Cirina: No demands shall we make of you save these:  heed our comrades’ words, and honor the law of the Steppe!

Hien: Before I fought for the Mol, I fought for my homeland─for Doma…

Sadu: To Doma would you have us go, to fight your war and win your freedom?

Sadu: Very well. The battlefield matters not, nor else the enemy. In battle do our souls burn bright.

Sadu: And better the Mol’s law than that of the Sun. Arrogant and foolhardy were their pronouncements. Already you and yours show better sense.

Magnai: The Sun shall answer your call, Doman. Wild as the wind the udgan and her brood may be, but they will deliver you naught. We will deliver you your kingdom.

 Gosetsu: Well then! I believe naught remains but to return to Doma at the head of a Xaela army, my lord! I cannot wait to see the look on Yugiri’s face…

Hien: Nor I. We shall depart as soon as our forces are assembled and rejoin our comrades. And then, my friends, we shall bring freedom to the people of Doma!

[Back in Mol Iloh]

Hien: Your imperial friend has truly impeccable timing. Had he come even a few moments earlier, he might actually have stood a chance.

Hien: In any event, that is two battles won in a single day. Which, by my reckoning, gives us twice the cause to celebrate!

Hien: But first, I pray you grant me a moment to express my gratitude. Thanks to you, we are one step closer to freeing my homeland from the tyranny of the Empire. I am in your debt.

Hien: Of course…if all goes to plan, this is like to be but the first of many such debts. Yet I promise to endure my insolvency with a smile, out of gratitude to the kami for seeing fit to send you hither.

Hien: Ah, but it would be rude of me to monopolize your attention. Doubtless there are others who would speak with you.

Hien: Let us go and greet Temulun Khatun.

Temulun: Welcome, warriors of the Steppe. It is an honor to receive you once more.

Temulun: We observed the battle from a distance, and marked the moment of your triumph. In that instant, I wept tears of joy.

Temulun: Not only did you bring us victory in the Naadam, but you ensured that every one of my kinsmen returned with their lives.

Cirina: Some were more gravely wounded than others, but none were lost to us. We could not have asked for anything more.

Cirina: If it is not too much of an imposition, would you be willing to go and speak with them? A simple gesture for those with whom you shared the battlefield.

[What, more speeches? Sigh. Sure, why not.]

Diligent Mol Warrior: Some part of me still struggles to believe it, but we won! We defeated the Oronir and the Dotharl and won!

Diligent Mol Warrior: When they appeared before us I was filled with such fear as I had never known. But then I saw you charge with Cirina and the others, and before I knew it, I was running and shouting…

Diligent Mol Warrior: I will carry the memory of that moment with me always. As well as the moment when you became one with the ovoo and were declared khagan!

Diligent Mol Warrior: The victorypose you struck was a sight to behold! I say, would you be willing to show us again?

[/victorypose]

Zealous Mol Warrior: Aye, that’s the stuff of legends! That’s the khagan in all his splendor!

Diligent Mol Warrior: Praise be to the khagan, and to the gods for guiding him to us!

Weary Mol Warrior: Glory to the khagan and his comrades! Forever and forever! A hundred years! The khagan!

Cirina: Ah, Auric! I am told you gave the young warriors a fine show!

Cirina: Grandmother and I have been discussing how we might best express our gratitude to you. Mere words did not seem sufficient.

Cirina: This is a morin khurr─a traditional instrument of our people.

Cirina: The feats of our greatest heroes, like Bardam and Chakha, are preserved in song. Yours too will live on for years to come.

Cirina: Perhaps one day you might learn how to play it! But, even if not, you may look on the morin khurr and remember this time, this place. As we will when we hearken to the music.

[I’m a paladin at the moment, not a bard, but thanks anyway!]

Hien: At the risk of sounding impatient, we have certain pressing obligations. It is time that we saw to them.

Temulun: …You are right. To whom much is given, much is expected.

Gosetsu: Nay, do not think yourselves so indebted to us. Was it not you who gave us your blessing to participate in the Naadam─and you who saved my lord Hien from certain death?

Gosetsu: Doma is in your debt, and will ever be a friend to the Mol.

Cirina: And we to you, Gosetsu!

Cirina: A thought occurs to me. If you wish to return to Yanxia with all haste, the passage to the south of the Dusk Throne would offer the most direct route.

Cirina: The Dotharl sealed it with their magicks during the Doman rebellion, when more men in iron came from afar.

Hien: If ever there were a time to open the pass, it is now. We should journey to Dotharl Khaa.

Hien: But before that, might we visit the Dawn Throne? I wish to speak with our most radiant brother.

Lyse: Are you sure that’s a good idea? I know he agreed to fight for Doma, but I doubt he’ll be very happy to see us so soon after we beat him.

Cirina: Nhaama made us for war, Lyse. Ever since we came into this world, we have fought.

Cirina: In the Naadam, blood was shed, and lives were lost. Brown earth was stained crimson, and Xaela wept.

Cirina: But crimson is the dusk and the dawn. Death and rebirth. An ending to mark a new beginning.

Cirina: “We who are born are destined to die. As the seasons turn, we are born again.“ Thus spoke the first.

Cirina: So you see, we harbor no hatreds. The Naadam is the Naadam, and what comes after is what comes after!

Lyse: If you say so… The Dawn Throne first, then?

Cirina: Yes. And I shall accompany you!

[At the Dawn Throne. Magnai looks depressed.]

Magnai: The Sun is disinclined to entertain you at length. Speak your purpose in coming.

Lyse: <sigh> Humble as ever…

Magnai: Should I be humble in the presence of inferiors? I am a child of Azim, and you are not. Your triumph in the Naadam does not raise you to such heights.

[Baatu’s usual spot is empty.]

Magnai: Baatu will not be joining us. He was wounded in the Naadam.

Magnai: …His hurts are grave, and he requires rest. But he will walk again in time.

Magnai: Though it is no business of yours. Such pity does not become a khagan. We are not allies, traveler─far from it. The Naadam will come again, and with it our rule.

Magnai: I say again, why have you come? To bid us surrender the Dawn Throne to the Mol?

Cirina: N-Nay. The Mol are beholden to the will of the gods, and they would not have us reside here. The Oronir and the Buduga may remain.

Hien: We are for Yanxia, and wished to speak of your part in the coming war.

Magnai: Ah, the Domans and the ironmen. I remember our pact. Sound the call and the Oronir will answer.

Hien: Full glad am I to hear it. We have preparations to attend to, but will send for you soon.

Cirina: The gods are kind! I am sure the Oronir will prove a great boon in the days to come.

Magnai: Of the dusk…a maiden gentle and ethereal. A dancer in the morning mist. And a warrior besides…

Magnai: Look into my eyes, child! See you Azim? Are you my Nhaama!?

[He’s hitting on Cirina? Here I thought he had a thing for Sadu.]

Cirina: I…I know not of what you speak, Brother Magnai, but I am certain you are mistaken. Quite.

Lyse: We should get going. Right now.

[We meet with Sadu in the south by the closed pass to Yanxia.]

Sadu: Hmph. The khagan and his warriors.

Gosetsu: Greetings, my lady. We come to you on our journey south, bound for Yanxia where our comrades await us. How fare you and yours in the wake of the Naadam?

Sadu: Many were wounded. Some few to the death.

Sadu: …Resplendent were their souls in the chaos. It was a good battle─a good day to die. Soon we will greet them again.

Sadu: …And mayhap one who went before them also. Geser’s seed has quickened in his lover. When the child is born, we shall see who waits behind its eyes.

Sadu: Already we must look to the next Naadam. We must grow strong of body and mind, and your war will help us do so. Say the word and we will fly to the field.

Hien: Of that I have no doubt. For you are Dotharl.

Cirina: There is one more thing we would ask of you… The magicks you used to seal the passage to the south. Will you unmake them?

Sadu: If that be your wish.

Gosetsu: When next we come together, it will be on a great battlefield against a common foe. I trust you will fight with the same fervor you demonstrated during the Naadam.

Sadu: Hah! And you, ancient one, will be the demon I know you to be. Aught less would be a disappointment.

[The southern pass to Yanxia is open.]

Cirina: Sadu Khatun has done her part. This passage will deliver you to Doma.

Cirina: It is here we must part ways, until the day you call us to battle.

Lyse: It won’t be long, I know, but…take care of yourself, Cirina. And tell your grandmother and the others again how much we appreciate everything they did for us.

Cirina: I will. Oh, I nearly forgot! I have another gift for you.

Lyse: Oh, it’s…a red, um…? Wait, is this a banner of the Mol tribe?

Cirina: It is not the most practical of gifts, but we nevertheless wished to present it to you.

Cirina: I do not fully understand what has befallen Doma, or your homeland, Lyse. But I do understand that you and yours have suffered terribly.

Cirina: The Mol place their faith in the gods, and in turn they shepherd us. They watch over and keep us. We pray they show you the same favor.

Cirina: As it was in the Naadam, blood will be shed, your lands engulfed in a storm of fire and steel. Yet as it did here, it shall mark a new beginning there.

Cirina: May you ever walk in crimson. For in crimson there is life. There is liberation.

Hien: Thank you for your prayers, Cirina. We shall remember them.

Cirina: Until we meet again!

Hien: Right, then. To the House of the Fierce. With me, my friends!


Gosetsu: I have not used this road before, but… Ah. I recognize this place.

Gosetsu: The House of the Fierce should lie somewhere to the south. I will go on ahead and inform the sentries of our master’s return.

Hien: Here we are! I wonder if they all are gathered inside, waiting…perhaps expecting a speech or some such…

Hien: Well! No matter! I shall have to do what I shall have to do!

[In the House of the Fierce]

Hien: Brothers and sisters, pray forgive me my absence. It has been far too long.

Yugiri: Lord Hien!

Yugiri: Gosetsu told us of your trials and tribulations on the Steppe. Would that I had been present to witness your victory, my lord.

Hien: Our victory, Yugiri, owed as much to each of my stalwart comrades as it did to me. Now, rise─I will not suffer this excess of formality any longer.

Hien: Alphinaud and Alisaie Leveilleur, I presume? I am told we owe you much. It is a pleasure to meet you both.

Alphinaud: The pleasure is ours, Lord Hien. Though we were born and raised a world apart, our values are one and the same:  freedom, justice, liberty. Each of which Doma shall soon enjoy once more.

Alisaie: Hopefully. I understand you have brought an army?

Hien: Indeed. The Xaela tribes of the Azim Steppe have pledged their military might to the cause.

Alisaie: Good. We, meanwhile, have secured the support of the Confederacy, and a not insignificant number of your countrymen.

Alisaie: The Blue Kojin, too, have expressed a willingness to join the fight─provided you agree to certain trade agreements following the liberation of Doma.

Yugiri: The shinobi will render what aid they can. However, Sui-no-Sato refused to answer our call.

Hien: No matter. What forces we have amassed far exceed my original expectations. You have my thanks.

Alphinaud: You should know that Zenos departed Doma not long after you left to find Lord Hien. We know not the reason why, but it would seem he was eager to return to Gyr Abania.

Lyse: What? Have you heard anything from the Resistance? There hasn’t been another attack, has there?

Alphinaud: Tataru assures me they are quite well. You need not worry. If anything, this turn of events would seem to be to our advantage.

Alisaie: But there the good news ends. Yotsuyu retains her position as acting viceroy, and we have reports that the garrison at Doma Castle is preparing for a massive operation…

Alisaie: We suspect that the Empire’s attempt to eliminate you on the Steppe may have been a prelude to a larger effort to purge the remaining pockets of resistance within Doma.

Gosetsu: The hour of reckoning is upon us.

[“…Then victory will soon be ours!”]

Hien: Hah hah hah! The khagan has spoken! And I for one am not inclined to argue.

Hien: In this place, in this moment, I call upon you all! Twenty-five years of oppression, of tyranny, of shame─it ends with us! We will prevail!

Alphinaud: Once more, welcome back. It is good to see you again, Auric.

Alphinaud: Ah, yes. There is another recent development we neglected to share with you.

Alphinaud: Alisaie and I have been hard at work attempting to restore the aetheryte here to its former glory…and I am pleased to inform you that we succeeded!

Alphinaud: Suffice it to say, it should prove a boon for travel─well, for those replete with anima like you, at least…

Alphinaud: I imagine you are eager to hear the particulars of our plan. Allow me a moment to gather everyone’s attention…

Alphinaud: If all are in agreement, I will outline my plan to retake Doma Castle.

Alphinaud: First, Lyse and the Doman irregulars will conduct a series of raids against imperial targets throughout the surrounding area, with the aim of drawing the garrison’s attention.

Alphinaud: Shortly thereafter, our Xaela allies will launch a surprise attack on the castle’s airborne defenses.

Alphinaud: In this way, we will prevent the enemy’s airships from rendering support, and cut off one means of escape.

Alphinaud: Alisaie and I, together with the shinobi, will exploit the ensuing chaos to infiltrate the Moon Gates and disable the magitek field generators.

Alphinaud: Once the barrier is down, we will be free to cross the One River and reach Doma Castle. It is at this point that we must turn to our Confederate and

Kojin allies.

Alphinaud: They will commence to bombard the castle with cannon fire, while sailing west towards the Doman Enclave.

Lyse: Wait, the enclave? Why would you want them to sail away from the castle?

Alphinaud: Because the enclave is home to countless civilians.

Alphinaud: Once pressed, the imperials may well think to take them hostage, and I would fain forestall any such attempt.

Alphinaud: After we have secured the enclave, we may lay siege to Doma Castle directly. The main strength of the Doman Liberation Front, under Lord Hien’s command, shall be committed to this endeavor, as will you and your redoubtable allies.

Alphinaud: The rest is simple. We scour the castle for the viceroy, we find her, and we subdue her. Without their leader, what remains of the imperials’ morale will crumble, and they will surrender or attempt to flee. And Doma will be free.

[Hien is looking pensive.]

Alphinaud: Your thoughts, Lord Hien? If any points were unclear or gave you cause for concern, I should be glad to go over them with you.

Hien: Nay, ’tis a fine plan. You have a talent for this, that much is plain.

Hien: We shall carry out Alphinaud’s plan to the letter. Time is of the essence, as you know, so let us each see to our respective preparations. Carry on!

Hien: There is no shortage of tasks which must needs be completed before we can launch our attack. If you have a moment, perhaps you could lend a hand?

Hien: That said, I have only just returned. ‘Twould be better for you to speak with Alphinaud to find out how you might be of service.

Alphinaud: Trying to keep busy? Full glad am I to hear it. There is one task which comes to mind.

Alphinaud: As I explained during my briefing, Alisaie and I will need to infiltrate the Moon Gates to disable the magitek field generators.

Alphinaud: Though I pride myself on my knowledge of various subjects, I must confess I lack confidence in my knowledge of this particular one. Which is why I turned to an expert.

Alphinaud: I have been conversing with Cid via Tataru, attempting to ascertain the design of the generators based on our limited intelligence. Most recently he sent a parcel with some documents which he believes may be of use.

Alphinaud: I would like for you to go to Kugane and bring them back here.

Alphinaud: In the meantime, I will continue to work with our shinobi allies to plot a path into the gates. Safe travels, Auric, and thank you again.

[Back to Kugane and the office in the Ruby Bazaar]

Tataru: Auric!? What are you doing here? I thought you were off fighting nomads on the Azim Steppe!

Tataru: …Oh, you beat them! Good show! A shame I didn’t get to see it.

Tataru: Alphinaud has been keeping me apprised of the situation in Doma. I may not be any good in a physical fight, but in an, err…paperwork…fight, I’m the true khagan! Yeah!

Tataru: You’re here for the parcel Cid sent, right? Wait a moment, and it will be right out!

Tataru: It arrived not long ago. A porter delivered it to our offices, along with various other knickknacks from Eorzea.

Tataru: Cid regrets that he couldn’t come here in person. Apparently his hunt for the dragon and Omega demands his full attention, you see…

Tataru: Still, he was reasonably confident that the documents he provided would be enough for Alphinaud to do the work himself. So as soon as that parcel gets here, we can open it up and see what’s inside!

Hancock: Pardon my interruption, but the parcel in question─was it the one you placed on the shelf in the back for safekeeping?

Tataru: I believe so, yes. Why do you ask?

Hancock: Well, you see, on closer inspection, said parcel appears to have been addressed to the Sekiseigumi Barracks.

Hancock: Though it does indeed bulge with a quantity of paper reminiscent of a rather large instruction manual, the lingering scent of lilac leads me to conclude it is in fact a sizable collection of love letters…

Tataru: What!? Impossible! That porter was carrying a parcel addressed to us! I saw the writing with my own eyes!

Hancock: Oh, I do not doubt that in the least. However, as he was tasked with a number of deliveries, I can only presume that he handed you another parcel by mistake.

Tataru: This is a disaster! We have to find that porter right this instant!

Hancock: My, she can move quickly when she has a mind to do so. So quickly she neglected to take these love letters with her. They too must be redirected to their rightful recipient.

Hancock: They should also aid you in tracking down the right porter. They keep records of their deliveries and so forth, after all.

Hancock: The man in question was of middling height and build. Not unlike myself. Black hair, short─terribly helpful in Kugane, I know. A cheery sort. Wearing bright colors, as I recall?

Hancock: I will send a few of my men out to search, but in the meantime, why don’t you take the parcel and see if you can’t track him down yourself? I will wait here, on the off chance he realizes his mistake and returns.

[And now, the Warrior of Light gets to track down the FedEx guy and fix his failures.]

Addled Assistant: Oh dear, oh dear… I misplaced some most important documents, and if I do not find them quickly, there will be dire repercussions…

Addled Assistant: No no, it is nothing so scandalous and base! My lord is a man with singular dietary restrictions, which I have detailed in my notebook. I cannot purchase produce without it!

[Oops, wrong guy.]

Overworked Porter: A good evening to you, sir, but I have no time to chat! I have to head to the Bokairo! …Or was it the Hostelry? Bah, no time, no time!

Overworked Porter: Hm? Aye, I recognize that parcel. I delivered it to the Ruby Bazaar not long ago. What of it?

Overworked Porter: Eh? A mistake? For the Sekiseigumi, you say?

Overworked Porter: Bah, you’re right! How stupid of me. Fortunately, I have yet to visit the barracks. This is for you, yes? I will take the other in exchange.

[Back to Tataru]

Tataru: I’m sorry, I couldn’t find him. I guess we just have to hope he realizes his mistake and returns soon…

Tataru: That’s it! That’s the parcel! You found him!

Tataru: Though, knowing our luck, Cid put the wrong papers in here…

Tataru: Nope, this is it! These are the documents detailing the operation of the magitek field generators Alphinaud requested!

Hancock: I can only imagine what would have happened had we sent Auric back to Doma with a parcel full of love letters. The look on Alphinaud’s face when he reads the first page… On second thought, I’m a little disappointed we didn’t.

Tataru: Everyone’s working so hard to fight for Doma’s freedom, and here I am, making the same silly mistakes…

Tataru: It won’t happen again, Auric! And I’ll keep working hard to bring you and the others useful information!

Tataru: If we hear anything new, we’ll contact you straightaway!

Hancock: Oh, and you may be pleased to hear that we have brokered an arrangement between the company and the Confederacy. They require armaments, we provide. Discreetly, and at a reasonable price.

Tataru: I’m sure Lord Lolorito was pleased to hear it.

Hancock: Ahaha! Indeed he was, indeed he was.

Tataru: Well, it seems our time together is at an end! Give Alphinaud and Alisaie my regards, will you?

[Yeah, I’m not surprised Lolorito is into arms dealing.]

Alphinaud: Oh! It seems like just yesterday you were here. Our plans proceed apace. Do you have the documents?

Alphinaud: Excellent! This looks to be exactly what we need.

Alphinaud: Assuming our shinobi escort can see us safely inside the Moon Gates, I should have no trouble deactivating the barrier. Good, good─that is one less thing to worry about…

 Alphinaud: Should you wish for further employment, mayhap you could speak with Alisaie?

Alphinaud: I believe she was planning to search the surrounding area for imperial patrols. If you go now, you may be able to catch her before she departs.

Alisaie: Alphinaud told you about my plans? And you wish to come with me? Well, far be it from me to refuse you.

Alisaie: If truth be told, I’m not entirely sure what I expect to find. In the wake of your failed assassination attempt, the imperials demonstrated uncharacteristic restraint. There were no public executions, and not a single village was put to the torch.

Alisaie: But, as I mentioned earlier, our latest intelligence does suggest a purge is imminent. For all we know, they could be out in the field even as we speak, surveilling their targets and making plans.

Alisaie: If so, we need to put a stop to it. Let us begin our search in the north.

[Outside, in the valley of the Fallen Rainbow.]

Alisaie: All quiet…for now. Follow me to the next location.

Alisaie: No imperial patrols near our headquarters, then. Good. The last thing we need is a repeat of Rhalgr’s Reach.

Alisaie: Even so, ‘twould be prudent to search a little longer.

[Alisaie is standing by a dead tiger.]

Alisaie: Not exactly the enemy I was worried about. …Damn it all. I can’t just leave the carcass lying in the middle of the road.

[“You’ve gotten stronger.”]

Alisaie: …Next to you, I feel like a child playing at swords and sorcery. Though mayhap it suits me better than books.

Alisaie: I owe much to a Miqo’te I met on my travels. He was a master of these techniques, and kindly agreed to teach me the fundamentals.

Alisaie: But I never could warm to common rapiers. I vastly preferred using a blade of my own creation, despite the toll it took on me. Urianger’s gift was a godssend, to be honest.

Alisaie: Anyway, we’re falling behind. We should split up, and try to recoup some lost time.

Alisaie: We’ve heard rumors of imperial soldiers skulking about disguised as villagers. One was supposedly spotted near the Ribbons, to the south of here. Go and see if there’s anything out of the ordinary.

Haunted Elder: Oh… Hello there, young man. My associates and I are in search of fertile soil for farming, and this land caught our eye.

Haunted Elder: …You doubt my words? You suspect we have some other purpose in coming here? How vexing it is to be questioned in this manner.

Haunted Elder: Very well. He desires the truth, and he shall have it. Deal with him!

[Yeah they were Imperials.]

[Alisaie caught one too.]

Alisaie: I saw them attack you, while this one fled. Since you seemed to have everything in hand, I decided to capture him. An imperial, I presume?

Haunted Elder: I knew it would come to this… But at the hands of a Westerner? A Doman would at least know the rites…

Haunted Elder: You think you understand, but you do not. She will burn it all before she surrenders. She will never kneel again. Nor should she…

Alisaie: Auric!

[The captured Imperial looks at the Warrior of Light in a strangely intense way – and suddenly the Echo activates. The Imperial lashes out as the vision begins….]

[A neatly dressed Imperial officer stands before a Doman mother and her son, who is perhaps ten years old.]

Keen-eyed Soldier: …Rest assured, the Naeuri will receive due compensation. Young Asahi has great potential─that much is plain.

Keen-eyed Soldier: If he applies himself, he may one day be granted the opportunity to go to Garlemald and learn from some of the leading authorities in the field of magitek. Few citizens are afforded such treatment, however─much less people of the provinces. You will need to do more─

Doting Mother: Oh, oh, of course! Have no doubt that we shall! My husband and I want only the best imperial education for our boy!

[A skinny girl a few years older than the boy approaches.]

Starveling Girl: I’ve finished planting the rice, Mother…

Doting Mother: Not while the officer is here, Yotsuyu! Inside! Now!

Yotsuyu: Yes, Mother.

Keen-eyed Soldier: You did not mention that you had a daughter.

Doting Mother: My sister’s, not mine─kami rest her soul. She is utterly hopeless, but one cannot choose one’s family.

Keen-eyed Soldier: Indeed… She is of age to receive an education as well, is she not? Yet we have no records. I trust I need not remind you of your legal obligations─

Doting Mother: No, no! Of course not! But she is weak and sickly. Some days, she has not the strength to leave her bed! Though…a thought occurs to me. Mayhap we can come to an understanding…

[The soldier looks thoughtfully at the girl, who stares back, wide-eyed.]

[The vision fades.]

[Alisaie is standing over the unmoving body of the Imperial soldier.]

Alisaie: That was a near thing.

Alisaie: What happened? We were talking, and then all of a sudden you were somewhere else. Did one of those soldiers hit you on the head or something?

Alisaie: Well, if you say so… We should go and tell the others what happened here.

[The Warrior of Light looks at the Imperial soldier’s body. He may be an older version of the officer from the vision.]

[Back at the House of the Fierce]

Alisaie: Thank you. You didn’t have to come with me, but you did, and for that I am grateful.

Alisaie: I told the others of our encounter with the disguised soldiers. Though we disposed of the bodies, it is only a matter of time before their comrades note their absence.

Alisaie: As if we needed any more reason to act quickly…Are you sure you’re all right, by the way? You’ve been awfully quiet since we returned…

Alisaie: I’d tell you to rest and leave the rest to the others, but seeing as that isn’t in your nature…

Alisaie: Lyse returned but a moment ago, looking a bit worried. It would seem that trouble is afoot in Namai.

Alisaie: You may as well go and ask her about it. As for me, I will not impose upon you any further.

Lyse: We’ve barely got enough armor as it is, huh…

Lyse: Oh, you’re here to help? That’s a relief. I’ve been trying to help the villagers in Namai get ready for the operation, but we’ve run into a few problems…

Lyse: You remember how we’re supposed to stir up trouble as a diversion, right? Well, the thing is, we don’t have enough armor to go around.

Lyse: I thought the Doman Liberation Front would be able to furnish us with some, but it seems that’s not the case. I was about to go and tell Isse─why don’t you come too?

Isse: Oh, you’re here too. I heard about those soldiers you and Alisaie encountered. I’m glad you’re all right… Ahem. Right, then…

Chigusa: Isse─we have gathered up all the rope we could find in the village.

Miyama: And every tool with an edge, but it is still not enough. Even a hoe would suffice, but there are no more to spare.

Isse: Thank you, Chigusa. Ryosen could use a hand, if there is nothing else.

Isse: As for more tools…I may have some in my home. Go and search it─take whatever meets your needs.

Azami: I made enough rice balls for everyone─including some special ones for Lady Yugiri. Can I go and give them to her?

Isse: Y-You silly little girl, of course you can! Hurry! You never know when she’ll have to leave on a secret mission!

Isse: Sorry about that. Everyone’s been trying to contribute since Lord Hien returned. There’s so much to worry about.

Lyse: You’re doing well, Isse…though I have to ask:  have you had any luck finding more armor?

Isse: Unfortunately, no. Unlike weapons, there are no substitutes for proper protection…

Isse: It’s not as though we need full suits of imperial plate, but we’re not soldiers. If we attack without any equipment, we’ll be slaughtered.

Lyse: The Doman Liberation Front doesn’t have any armor to spare. I suppose we could ask Hancock, but there’s no telling how long it would take for him to send us supplies…

Lyse: Do you have an armorer in the village, or anyone with some skill to fashion armor?

Isse: There is one man. A craftsman who fled the enclave. He is experienced, and may be able to help.

Isse: I don’t know if I can persuade him to, though. But maybe you two could come with me?

Isse: His name is Tsuranuki, and he lives in Kusakari, in the south. Come with me.

[In the South]

Tsuranuki: Bwahahaha! Who are these starry-eyed youths who stand before me?

Tsuranuki: Ones who sing of rebellion? Of liberation? Hah hah hah! Surely they would not think to trouble me with such foolish dreams!

Tsuranuki: Oh, go and say what you will. But do not take offense if I die from laughter! Bwahahaha!

Tsuranuki: Eh? Say again? You would have me fashion armor for villagers who wish to fight imperial regulars?

Tsuranuki: Bwahahaha! Mad fools charging boldly to meet their deaths! Bring me steel and I shall give them shells to shield their soft bellies.

Tsuranuki: Yes, yes, plates of steel, all that you can carry. The better to shield them from blade and bullet!

Isse: If only it were so simple, Master Tsuranuki. Steel plates are not so easily procured─

Tsuranuki: Blind, deaf, and dumb you are, boy! We are awash in broken steel. Magitek, great cylinders come crashing to the earth from on high!

Tsuranuki: Shatter them to bits with my explosives. They will not fail you, for I made them to kill imperials, heh heh! Bring me my steel, and you will have your armor.

Lyse: …Well, it’s not like we know any other armorers who can help. At least we get to blow things up!

[I’m always up for that.]

Tsuranuki: Eh? Eh!? You have the many plates of steel I demanded? Show me!

Tsuranuki: Bwahahaha! Then you are committed to your cause! Dressing villagers as soldiers and marching off to war…

Tsuranuki: Stupid, stupid fools! Doma is dead, and so are her people!

Tsuranuki: Lord Kaien, Lord Hien─all dead! Their blood is on our hands!

 Tsuranuki: ‘Twas Lord Kaien who saved us. Who spared us the worst when the Garleans came.

Tsuranuki: Every shred of pride and honor he cast aside, without a second thought! All to win their trust. All to serve as their puppet. Restored to his throne years later, a paper tiger.

Tsuranuki: Such shame he must have felt, but no matter! He would suffer it for his people. A life as slaves is better than none at all, he believed. But not us.

Tsuranuki: After my lady died, we began to whisper in his ears dreams of freedom and liberation. We pushed him to take action, if only a little…

Tsuranuki: Ten years of preparation, of machinations. So careful we would be, and yet…and yet!

Tsuranuki: Doma burned for our foolishness, not for that of Lord Kaien. Monzen, the enclave─they were razed for our sins! We murdered them all, don’t you see? We murdered you all!

Isse: …You’re wrong, Master. We are still here. We are still alive.

 Isse: Lord Kaien too lives on. In our hearts, and in his son, for Lord Hien has returned.

Tsuranuki: Lord Hien? Alive!? It cannot be. You lie. You lie!

Lyse: It’s the truth! Hien came back to Doma to help her fight for freedom!

Tsuranuki: Could…could it be? My lord Hien yet lives? Oh…oh…

Tsuranuki: Bands of steel to bind the chest and belly, yes, yes! I must heat the forge and begin work at once!

Tsuranuki: Ten? One hundred? How many do you need? All that and more you shall have!

Lyse: Even after twenty-five years of oppression, they still have it in them to stand up and fight. We just have to show them the way forward…

Lyse: Isse and I will stay and help Tsuranuki finish the armor, so you’ve no need to wait around.

Lyse: Why not go back to the House of the Fierce? I’m sure there’s plenty of work left to be done. Ask about and see what you can find!

[Back to the House of the Fierce. Anyone need a hand?]

Kaidate: Everything is in order, sir! Under Lord Gosetsu’s sage tutelage, we grow stronger by the day!

Motojiro: Hm? Help? Oh, no, no, no─I will not impose upon you without cause! Rest assured that everything is in its place, and every place is in…everything is fine!

Haname: I require no assistance, comrade. Lord Hien’s instructions to me were quite clear─I need only transcribe them for the benefit of our Xaela allies.

Haname: Speaking of Lord Hien, if you are eager to be of service, mayhap you could seek him out? Keep an eye on him, perchance, should he decide to venture outside?

[What’s up, Hien?]

Hien: Hmm, let me guess:   someone asked you to act as my protector? Hah! To hear them mutter, one would think I intended to stride up to the castle gates on my own!

Hien: The truth, of course, is rather less dramatic. I had hoped to look on the castle one last time before the battle. Would you care to join me? You would be setting a lot of fretful minds at rest…

Hien: Very good! Then let us depart for Monzen at once.

[In Monzen]

Hien: Monzen was home to many great and powerful families. Men of honor─samurai. Once…

Hien: Great swaths were razed, and people put to the sword. What little remains stands as a testament to what was…and what will never be again.

Hien: …Come. I would take a closer look.

Hien: No sentries, at least of the living sort. Those shambling suits of armor have the run of the place. To think this was once a bustling street, so full of life…a river of people, with a current all its own…

Hien: …But even then, the imperials walked among us. Sometimes openly, sometimes discreetly, but we were always aware of their presence. And we…we were complicit.

Hien: He did what he had to do to preserve the peace. To keep our people safe. But at what cost…

Hien: F-Forgive me, this is neither the time nor the place for such dark musings! Though they did serve to remind me of the barracks which once stood to the west of here…where there may yet be weapons our comrades could use.

Hien: If you head down that street, past those makeshift barricades, you will come to the ruins. I will search elsewhere. Meet me at the water’s edge when you have finished.

Hien: Alas, I found naught of value. Did you?

[I got a katana.]

Hien: Still sheathed in its scabbard…though even shielded from the elements, it will need to be cleaned and oiled─

Hien: …I recognize the crest. It belonged to the son of a samurai I trained with when I was young.

Hien: He never even had the chance to draw it…

Hien: There she is. Doma Castle. My home.

Hien: They let us keep her for a time, before gradually moving their forces across from Fluminis. Now her every court and corridor belongs to Yotsuyu.

Hien: Though Father spent much of his time there, I did not. I may only have visited him there on half a dozen occasions, if that. I cannot remember.

Hien: But I remember the view from the keep. Doma seemed much smaller from there. Like you could hold it in your hands.

Hien: Well, Monzen at least. Doma is so much more than that. There, beyond the Moon Gates, unto the shores of the Ruby Sea, and here, in the places that no man can see or touch or take from you…

Hien: We carry her with us, wheresoever we go.

Hien: Not the land or the soil…but the story.

Hien: And what is life if not a story? The story of our journey from dawn to dusk, day after day after day. The story of our mothers and our fathers, our families and our friends, our peoples and our nations.

Hien: I think a part of me understood that, when I looked out from the keep. Hien, son of Kaien. Another caretaker of the story of Doma.

Hien: It’s a fine castle, truly, with an even finer view. But in the end…

Hien: In…in the end…

Hien: Kami strike me down, how could I be so blind! We must return to the House of the Fierce at once!

Hien: I have had what can only be described as a revelation. Ours is an excellent plan, but not so excellent that it cannot be improved─and I know how.

Hien: On second thought, Auric, I ask that you return to the House of the Fierce without me, and tell Alphinaud to call the others together for a meeting.

Hien: It is imperative that the Kojin emissary be in attendance as well. I shall join you anon.

[Back in the House of the Fierce.]

Alphinaud: Lord Hien wishes to discuss the details of our plan? Very well, if he insists. I shall summon the others at once.

Alphinaud: As for the Kojin, I believe one of their emissaries was already en route. Nevertheless, I shall contact them to make certain.

[The group assembles.]

Alisaie: May I present the Blue Kojin’s emissary.

Soroban: Greetings and well met, old friends! The elder sends his regards.

Lyse: Soroban! It’s good to have you with us!

Hien: If, uh, you might humor me…

Hien: Thank you for coming, Soroban. Doubtless you have already been informed of our plans and the role we would have your people play. However, I seek your counsel as a Kojin of the Blue.

Hien: Be it by spell or siegecraft, could your forces destroy the underwater foundations of Doma Castle’s outer wall?

Soroban: Hmm… Explosives, coupled with a few incantations… Yes, that might produce sufficient force. Such a thing could indeed be done.

Hien: Then I wish to revise the plan.

Hien: Instead of assisting the Confederacy in securing the enclave, I would have the Kojin advance upstream, beneath the water, and breach a segment of the outer wall.

Hien: I mean to flood Doma Castle.

Gosetsu: My lord, the castle is a sacred symbol─the very heart of our nation! To destroy it is unthinkable, unconscionable─you cannot do this!

Hien: I can and I will if it improves our chances. By flooding the castle we remove the better part of their forces from the field and force Yotsuyu to retreat to the highest levels of the keep. Tell me that is not a worthwhile trade.

Gosetsu: But, my lord…that castle was entrusted to you by your father, and his father before him. I say to you again:  it is the heart of our nation.

 Hien: Stone walls do not a nation make, my friend. Her people do. And as long as we yet live, we can rebuild.

Hien: So let us only think of this battle. Of victory here and now. For without that, we have no future.

Alphinaud: I see that you are resolved, Lord Hien, and I would not presume to gainsay your decision.

Soroban: I will inform the elder of your revised stratagem, and instruct our sappers to make ready.

Hien: Our preparations are all but complete. Once we receive word from our Kojin allies, we shall set our plans in motion. We shall fight, and we shall prevail.

[Talking to folks before the fight.]

Yugiri: No plan is perfect, and there is ever room for improvement. I expect my comrades will be refining their approach until the moment they begin.

Yugiri: In case you are unaware, the other jonin will lead the assault on the Moon Gates, not I. My place is at Lord Hien’s side.

Lyse: If there’s nothing else, I’ll head back to Namai. Tsuranuki’s working hard, and Isse’s doing what he can to help, but maybe there’s more that I can do too.

Lyse: He was like a different person when he began hammering those plates. Younger, brighter, full of life and hope…

Gosetsu: The plan is set, and all that can be done has been done. Rest and relaxation are now paramount, for tomorrow we may die.

Gosetsu: Have you too not done enough? Will you not pause a moment to gather yourself on the eve of our grand design? Go not unto battle with weary eyes or lingering regrets, my friend.

Alphinaud: Soroban informs me that his sappers will be ready within the day, which means that we can proceed as planned and attack Doma Castle tomorrow.

Alphinaud: Considering the key role you will play, I think it only prudent that you refrain from further labors and rest until tomorrow. Agreed?

[“No rest for the righteous!”]

Alphinaud: True enough, true enough. When you have seen to your sundry tasks and are ready to retire, I pray you let me know.

[Apparerently the plot won’t progress until I take the other dialogue option.}

[“Far be it from me to refuse…”]

Alphinaud: We shall speak again in the morning. Take care, my friend…

[As the Warrior of Light heads to bed, he encounters Lyse.]

Lyse: You’re awake. I was just, um… Well, they threw me out, actually. Told me I needed to get some sleep, ready for the big day.

Lyse: Not long now, eh? I’m nervous, of course, but I also feel like…like I didn’t know where I was going, but maybe, finally…

Lyse: Something’s gonna change, you know? Really, really change. And when the dust has settled, we’ll see what we’ve won…and what we’ve lost…

Lyse: I’m going to give it my all tomorrow. Everything I’ve seen and felt…I won’t let it be for nothing.

Lyse: Right. Off to bed! Don’t want to overdo it─and neither should you.

Lyse: Oh, but before you sleep, you should look in on Alphinaud and Alisaie. Quietly, of course.

[The twins are at the planning table, leaning against each other – both asleep.]

[At a nearby table, Gosetsu and Hien are…getting drunk? Yes, getting drunk.]

Hien: Ho, another restless soul. Come, come─raise a glass to freedom.

Gosetsu: Mmm, good, good. I should be interested to know his thoughts on the matter!

Hien: That’s enough, Gosetsu. You’ll not convince anyone with your drunken ramblings.

Hien: We’ve talked about this. All of us. We are flooding the castle tomorrow, and that’s the end of it.

Gosetsu: I know, I know! I accepted your decision, and I do not intend to go back on my word. Nevertheless, as the battle draws near, I cannot help but recall our many travails, and it fair compels me to speak…

Gosetsu: In all my time serving as a leader of men, there are two failures which haunt me to this day.

Gosetsu: The first, our defeat at the hands of the Empire twenty-five years past, and the subsequent imprisonment of your father.

Gosetsu: Long did I consider offering up my life in atonement, until Lord Kaien, allowed at last to receive visitors, called for me of all people…

Gosetsu: “For my unborn child,“ he said, ”for my dearest Shun─live!“

Gosetsu: My second failure, of course, was the betrayal of that selfsame command, when in the rebellion I failed to protect not only Lord Kaien, but Lord Hien too…

Gosetsu: That I yet live, having known such disgrace, is an affront to the kami themselves…

Gosetsu: Yet you…all of you…saw fit to grant this shameful creature, this failure, another chance…to serve a greater purpose…

Gosetsu: Thank you…for pitying an old fool…

Hien: Now, now, it is far too soon for that. Save your tears for the morrow. You may be sure we will have ample cause to shed them, be they for joy or despair.

Hien: Bah! Even that sounds morose. We who yet walk the path should not think too much on the destination. When the hour arrives, we shall welcome what comes with open arms.

Hien: He is right about one thing, though─we have you and yours to thank for this chance.

Hien: All debts will be repaid. On that you have my word. But first, we must live past tomorrow, no?

[Hien notices someone lurking.]

Hien: If you’ve no intention of sleeping, Yugiri, you may as well join us.

Yugiri: Forgive me, my lord. I did not mean to, uh… If that is your will…

[The next day]

Hien: There he is. I trust you are none the worse for wear after last night.

Hien: We received confirmation from the Kojin not long ago. Their sappers stand at the ready and await our signal.

Hien: Let us not keep them and the others waiting. Gather your things─we depart at once.

Hien: Alphinaud─instruct Lyse and the others to move into position and launch their attack.

Hien: Our scouts report no change in the imperials’ disposition, but I would leave nothing to chance. We must act quickly, lest we lose the element of surprise.

Alphinaud: Understood. I will relay your orders to her and rejoin my unit.

Alphinaud: Gosetsu and Yugiri await the two of you at Monzen. Good luck, my friends. I will see you both again soon.

[At Monzen]

Lyse: Understood. Wish us luck.

Lyse: Right, you all know what you have to do. Are you ready?

Isse: Oh, yes. Ready to show them what a good job they made of breaking us!

Lyse: Then what are you waiting for? Move out!

[At Fluminis]

Imperial Sentry: Why must we waste our time guarding this blasted…

[He looks up as a horde of armed Doman peasants pour into the gate, Isse in the lead with a bow.]

Imperial Sentry: Sound the alarum! Fluminis is under attack! Armed insurgents have breached the perimeter! We need reinforcements!

[Lyse takes him out with a boot to the head.]

[On the linkpearl]

Lyse: This is Lyse. Imperial forces converging on our position. Looks like we’ve got their attention. We’ll be sure to keep them busy for as long as we can!

[Overhead, a flight of Xaela soar on their yols.]

Magnai: Ahh…war. To wield power, to make men kneel before you.There is no better feeling.

Magnai: A pity I must share this pleasure with a feral dog of a Dotharl!

Sadu: Preening, Oronir! You fear that she will put the Sun in shade!

Sadu: Those are for you. Go. Claim your prey.

[Cannons on the castle wall open fire on the Xaela, and drones launch to repel the air assault.]

Sadu: Bwahahaha! Come to me! Come to your death! With each that falls, my soul soars higher!

Magnai: Swiftly, brothers! Fall not behind! Make an offering of their steel to Father Azim!

[Hien watches from the ground.]

Hien: They seem to be enjoying themselves…

Gosetsu: My lord! The barrier!

[The force field in the Moon Gates shuts down.]

Alphinaud: The magitek field is down. I repeat, the magitek field is down! Confederate vessels, you are clear to advance upon the enclave!

[The pirate ships move in up the river and begin firing cannon at the castle walls.]

Yugiri: The wall is breached! The Kojin, too, will not be outdone!

Hien: Our allies have set the stage. Now we must take the castle.

Hien: With me!

[Yotsuyu stands looking out from the top floor of the castle, smoking her long pipe.]

Ill-at-ease Imperial: My lady, the riverside wall has been breached! The lower levels are already flooded, and the water is still rising!

Yotsuyu: So I gathered. He would tear the whole thing down…all for the promise of freedom. A noble sacrifice…or the last desperate flailings of a fool.

Yotsuyu: Speaking of which, how fares my brute?

Ill-at-ease Imperial: Th-The procedure was carried out as instructed by Lord Aulus. By all indications…it was a success.

Yotsuyu: Is that so? Then he may yet be of some use.

 Yotsuyu: Devotees of vengeance should rightly pursue their cause unto the bitter end, don’t you think? Their hearts aflame with passion until the last few embers fizzle and fade, leaving naught but ash…

Yotsuyu: The viceroy’s orders were clear. If Doma falls, none shall be spared his wrath. Tell the men to fight as if their lives depend on it. Because they do.

Ill-at-ease Imperial: A-As you command, my lady!

Yotsuyu: Again they come to make you kneel. To make you grovel and suffer.

Yotsuyu: But you have endured their worst and survived. You know their tricks. They will not find a flower simply waiting to be plucked…

[Outside the castle, on the river bank.]

Hien: Aye, there can be no doubt. The viceroy is trapped. And so comes our part.

Hien: Our Kojin allies will deliver us to our destination. To the western dock! And do not forget to bring your fellow adventurers, Auric!

[At the dock]

Blue Skiff Captain: Greetings and well met, my friends. Climb aboard, climb aboard! There is room enough for you all!

Hien: Auric. That we might improve our odds of success, we will divide into two parties upon arrival─one comprising you and your adventurer comrades, the other, Gosetsu, Yugiri, and myself.

Hien: Each will enter the keep via a separate route, dispatching any imperial forces that attempt to bar their path.

Hien: Even should one meet with misfortune, the other will reach Yotsuyu. Agreed?

Hien: Then let us be about it. For Doma!

[Dungeon level 67: Doma Castle. “DIE DIE DIE!”]

[Hien’s group has cornered a fallen Yotsuyu.]

Hien: Have you aught to say for yourself? For what you have done to our people─your people?

Yotsuyu: My people, he says. The precious lordling beloved by all come to confront the wicked witch.

Yotsuyu: My parents thought me no better. They worked me from dawn to dusk, like an ox or an ass or some other beast of burden. Until, that is, my brother spied a chance to transform the family fortunes.

Yotsuyu: And so I was married to a vicious old drunk who beat me as he pleased, and when I pleaded for help, I was told to grin and bear it. For the family. For him. For everyone’s sake. They pretended not to notice, but they knew. They knew.

Yotsuyu: What did it matter? I was nothing to them─less than nothing! I wasn’t of their flesh, I wasn’t a fellow Doman, I wasn’t even a person. I might just as well have been dead!

Yotsuyu: And then my husband passed away one day. And so I was sold off yet again, to pay his debts. But this time, this time, I found a way to live for myself. To survive. As a spy for the Empire.

Yotsuyu: Oh, those were the days, when the scales first fell from my eyes. No longer would I be a slave to my parents or my husband or the pleasure house. I would be free…and receive due compensation…

Yotsuyu: That would be enough, I thought…until I saw a Doman in the road, beaten and broken, and my heart…my heart skipped a beat…

Yotsuyu: Lying at my feet, groaning in agony, sobbing in despair. Powerless, helpless, hopeless! A vision forever seared into my soul…

Yotsuyu: There was nothing I would not do to feel that joy again! To bend this cruel, twisted world to my whims!…Now, having borne witness to my life’s work, have you aught to say to me?

[The castle shakes. Chunks of masonry start to fall from the ceiling.]

Yotsuyu: Heh heh… ‘Twas kind of you to lend me your ear, my lord. But now it is time for us to conclude our little tête-à-tête with a final game of chance…

Yotsuyu: Who shall stand, and who shall fall? Let the die be cast.

Yugiri: This was her plan from the first─to bring the keep down on our heads!

[Yotsuyu, seeing the group distracted, lunges and grabs her pistol and fires at Hien. But he parries the shot with his katana, slicing the bullet in half. And then he cuts down Yotsuyu.]

Hien: I will remember your words.

Hien: We must flee! Order our forces to withdraw!

[The group turns to flee, but the ceiling is coming down….]

[There is a crash, and we see Gosetsu holding up the remains of the ceiling, keeping it from crushing the rest of the group.]

Gosetsu: Go, my lord…while you still can. I cannot hold this forever.

Gosetsu: Do your duty. Deliver Lord Hien and the others to safety. Now, forthwith! I shall manage on my own.

[From the rubble, Yotsuyu manages to grasp her pistol once more. She fires it twice into Gosetsu’s chest.]

Yugiri: Gosetsu!

Yotsuyu: No…no one leaves… Not you or anyone else…

Gosetsu: …’Tis naught this old frame cannot bear!

Gosetsu: Go now, all of you! The day is won! And the morrow beckons!

[“This isn’t over!”]

Gosetsu: Do not despair, my friend. Never before have I felt so alive. My eyes unclouded, my purpose clear. This is right.

Hien: Gosetsu…

Hien: You never failed us. Not once. You served my father faithfully, and I am a better man for your guidance.

Hien: And the Doma we build together shall be better for it too!

Hien: Be proud, my friend. Be proud.

 Gosetsu: I am, Shun. More than you know.

[The group flees. Yotsuyu begins sobbing.]

Gosetsu: You cast the die. Gambling was never my vice.

[Outside the castle, the Xaela have picked up the party with their yol mounts.]

Cirina: How merciful the gods that I should find you in time…

Cirina: Gosetsu!? W-We must turn back now, before it is too late!

[The castle begins to crumble. Several large explosions tear it apart from inside.]

Hien: Eyes forward, Cirina. That was his wish.

Cirina: …I will deliver you to safety. The others are waiting.

[Back in Monzen]

Alphinaud: …I see. The occupation is ended, then. And the people must be informed of our victory.

Alphinaud: But I will not simply give up Gosetsu for lost. Before aught else, we must needs search the ruins.

Soroban: Allow me, my friends. The castle is still collapsing into the river, and could easily drag you to your deaths. I can navigate the waters easily, without fear of drowning.

Alisaie: Be reasonable, Brother. You know he is right.

Yugiri: Auric. A word, if I may.

Yugiri: My lord withdraws into himself, unable to turn his thoughts from the keep. He needs us now, more than ever…

Soroban: My friends, I am returned. I swam as far into the ruins as I could…

Lyse: And…? Did you find him?

Soroban: …Nay, lady. Naught remained of the keep for me to search.

Soroban: Undermined from below and shaken from above, the manner of its collapse was most unusual. If the floor beneath him gave way before the rest…it is not impossible that he could have been sent tumbling into the river.

Soroban: But the water is thick with silt and debris. Despite my best efforts, I could not find him. I am sorry.

Hien: …There is naught for which you should apologize. Thank you, Soroban, for taking it upon yourself to search.

Hien: The castle is in ruins, and the people are eager to learn the fate of their nation. We leave at once.

Alphinaud: Are you sure, my lord?

Hien: The day is won, and the morrow beckons…

Hien: It falls to us to greet it.

Lyse: …I’m going down to the docks to see if I can’t get one of the Confederate ships to take us to the enclave.

Alisaie: Mayhap we should tell the others at the House of the Fierce to gather there?

Cirina: Magnai and Sadu know naught of what happened in the castle. I will go and tell them.

Hien: They fought valiantly and with honor, Cirina. I pray you tell them that as well.

Hien: You too, my friend, were instrumental in this triumph. I must insist that you be present when we bring these tidings to my people.

[Down at the docks]

Tansui: …You all look like shite.

Tansui: The captain thought you might need a ride to the enclave. Ready to come aboard?

[“Let’s go.”]

Tansui: On you go, then. Sit wherever you like.

Tansui: I don’t know what happened in there, but it’s over. You won. That’s cause enough for celebration─and those people you’re about to see need something to celebrate…

[Back at the enclave]

Rasho: We brought everyone here. You are the last to arrive.

Hien: I see. Thank you. We owe the Confederacy a great debt…

Rasho: I have waited twenty-five years for this moment. You owe us naught.

Formidable Farmer: Look! It’s Lord Hien!

Yugiri: Some few words of encouragement would not go amiss, my lord.

Hien: Um… Right! Uh, yes. O-Of course…

[“You’re their lord, remember. Stand tall!”]

Hien: Forgive me. This is rather more daunting than I had anticipated. But you are right, I must be strong. Wish me luck.

Hien: We are a sorry lot, are we not. Tired, dirty, stinking of blood and sweat and ash. A people pushed to the point of breaking.

Hien: And yet we won.

Hien: The perseverance to endure decades of oppression. The will to carry on the legacy of those we have lost. These were the bonds that held us together and gave us the strength to reclaim our home.

Hien: After twenty-five hard years, the shadow of the Empire no longer darkens these lands, and we may at last look forward to the dawning of a new day. But, my friends, it will be a day of work.

Hien: So I ask you:  have you yet the strength to stand?

Hien: To rise up with me once more, here and now, and begin to rebuild our homeland?

Alisaie: This will not end with Doma. We will see to that. Right, Lyse?

Lyse: Right!

Alphinaud: Indeed, this is but the beginning. The tide is turning, and it shall soon bear us back across the seas, and onward unto the next battlefield.

Enclave Skiff Captain: Honored hero! You seek passage across the One River?

[Yes please.]

Alphinaud: Are you quite certain you would not prefer to stay awhile longer? There are sure to be festivities─at which you would be the guest of honor, like as not.

Alphinaud: Very well. There are other ways in which we might celebrate─by rejoining the fight for freedom in Gyr Abania, for one.

Alphinaud: Short though our time here has been, we have all come to regard this land and her people as our own, I think. But we have done that which we came here to do.

Alphinaud: Word of Doma’s liberation will soon spread throughout the Empire, and we must seize this opportunity to rekindle the fires of liberation in the West.

Alisaie: We dare not allow the imperials a moment’s respite, lest they march on Doma again. For the sake of all concerned, we should leave immediately.

Cirina: Did I hear you right? You are leaving?

Lyse: I’m afraid so. We’ve got our own battle to fight. What about you? Will you be heading back to the Steppe?

Cirina: Yes. The war here is ended, and there is no cause to remain. The Oronir and Dotharl have already withdrawn.

Cirina: I will follow them anon, but I wished to bid you farewell first.

Soroban: The Blue, too, must return to their homes, but we will be back. Doma has need of merchants and builders, and we are eager to offer our services!

Tansui: And just like that, our grand fellowship is broken? Without ceremony or pomp, you steal off into the dark?

Tansui: No matter. We have plenty to be getting on with. Places to be, people to rob, and so on. And the captain never was one for mingling.

Rasho: I am a pirate. Give me a song at the tavern, and I will be happy. Hobnobbing with Lord Hien? Nay.

Tansui: No taste for the finer things…

Tansui: In any event, we need not part ways here. If you are for Kugane, we would be happy to take you. Her waters have always been…fruitful.

Cirina: I wish you well on your journey, my friends. May you ever walk in crimson.

Lyse: Thank you, Cirina. For everything.

Soroban: May the kami speed you on your way! Until we meet again!

Rasho: Naught remains undone? You are ready to depart?

Rasho: To Kugane, then…

[In Kugane]

Rasho: Have everything? Good. We will need to weigh anchor before the Sekiseigumi arrive.

Rasho: …From the bottom of my heart, I thank you for what you did. Give my regards to the Ul’dahn.

Alphinaud: I informed Tataru of our coming. She and Hancock should be waiting for us in the Ruby Bazaar.

Alisaie: Then it is here we part ways. Best of luck to you and yours in your…piratical endeavors, I suppose.

[Ruby Bazaar]

Tataru: Welcome back, everyone, and congratulations on a job well done!

Alphinaud: It is a pleasure as ever to see your smiling face, Tataru. Less so yours, Hancock, though Rasho and I are sincerely grateful for your assistance.

Hancock: The pleasure was all mine, Master Alphinaud. I assure you.

Tataru: Anyway, you will be glad to hear that I have already chartered passage for you back to Limsa Lominsa.

Tataru: The ship is to leave port this very day, but the captain has agreed to wait until the four of you have boarded.

Alphinaud: The four of us? You mean to stay here in Kugane?

Tataru: Yes. I gave it some thought, and I realized that even with Doma free, there’s still a need for a woman in the middle. Maybe even more than before, considering all the friends and alliances you made.

Hancock: As I told her many times before, I would be more than willing to assist you─

Tataru: And as I told you many times before, I am not about to let you worm your way into our affairs and exploit our connections for your personal gain!

Hancock: Must you always presume the worst?

Tataru: So there you have it. I will remain here for now. You needn’t worry─I’m a regular at the hostelry and a half dozen other local institutions. Everyone loves me!

Tataru: So go, go! Don’t let me keep you. Buy your supplies and souvenirs while you still can!

Tataru: When you’ve finished, make haste to the docks. Pier number two, to be precise. I’ll be waiting for you there!

[Pier #2]

Tataru: First to arrive, as always. Hopefully the others will not be far behind…

Tataru: Ah, there you are! All packed and ready to go?

Alphinaud: To the best of my knowledge, yes. Apologies for the wait. The task of tying up loose ends invariably takes longer than one allows. Happily, however, all now seems to be in order.

Tataru: Then there’s nothing left to do but to board the ship! Do try and enjoy the journey, won’t you? It may be your last chance to rest for a while!

Alisaie: That would depend on the good captain’s choice of route.

Alphinaud: As ever, Tataru, I pray you take all due precautions while making your inquiries. Better to avoid the local authorities altogether than risk a repeat of our Ishgardian episode.

Alisaie: And what sordid episode is this, pray tell?

???: You there! Hold that ship!

[Hien and Yugiri come running up.]

Lyse: What are you two doing here? Shouldn’t you be in Doma?

Hien: Shouldn’t you? You left with nary a word! I half-wondered if I had done something to offend.

Yugiri: Upon learning that you had departed for Kugane, we immediately resolved to give chase. Our comrades can manage affairs in our absence, and it seemed the least we could do.

Lyse: You mean you came all this way just to say good-bye?

Hien: That too, aye, but there was something else I felt I had to say.

Hien: You helped us win our freedom, and for that I cannot thank you enough.

Hien: Accordingly, after we have established an interim government and so forth, I think it only meet that we repay the favor by dispatching our own forces to Eorzea. If you would have us.

Alphinaud: We harbored no expectations of such generous aid…and as there is no telling when the Empire might strike back at you, would it not be wiser to concentrate your resources on the defense of Doma?

Hien: I had a mind to pursue a more aggressive defense. To wit, we will send forth shinobi to provinces far and wide to spread word of our victory, that we might inspire others to take up arms as we did.

Hien: Even the Empire has its limits. If the Garleans cannot be certain where and when the next rebellion will take place, how can they commit another force to Doma?

Hien: And besides…so long as this debt remains unpaid, how am I to face myself? And Gosetsu?

Alphinaud: As you wish. I will relay your offer to the Eorzean Alliance.

Hien: All of Doma is counting on you to finish what we have started.

Hien: You have it in you, Lyse, to seize the future you want. Never forget.

Lyse: I won’t, Hien─not your words or anything else. Everything that led us here, that will drive us forward─I’ll carry it with me, always. And that’s a promise.

Hien: Hah hah! I will hold you to that!

Hien: Go with them to Eorzea. Tell their people of our triumph, and of our pledge to stand with them.

Yugiri: By your leave, I shall pave the way for our new alliance.

Tataru: Hurry up, you lot! The ship’s about to weigh anchor!

Hien: It seems our time is at an end. Go well, my friends…and may we meet again beneath a western sky.

[Meanwhile, in the Royal Palace in Ala Mhigo]

[Zenos is seated on his throne and he looks bored.]

Imperial Pilus Prior: I always knew that woman was unfit for command…

Imperial Tribunus Militum: Aye. When you think of all the resources we poured into that hole. And for what?

[Zenos kills the soldier standing in front of him. Perhaps for bringing bad news?]

Zenos Yae Galvus: The beast yet lives. Mayhap it is time I sharpen my claws.

Zenos Yae Galvus: I wonder, will you walk into my parlor once more…?

[Fordola strides into the chamber and salutes.]

Fordola: Fordola rem Lupis, come at the command of the lord viceroy to present the prisoner taken by the Crania Lupi!

[It’s Krile.]

Krile: Zenos yae Galvus, I presume?

Krile: It’s true what they say. You do have the eyes of a monster. A ravenous, insatiable fiend.

Zenos Yae Galvus: You. Give the Butcher your weapon.

Imperial Pilus Prior: My…? Yes, my lord!

[The soldier holds out his gunblade to Fordola. She takes it.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: A reward given in recognition of your service. I trust you will prove more capable than its former owner.

Fordola: I…I swear I’ll not disappoint you, my lord!

Zenos Yae Galvus: Good. Now, silence that mewling little piglet. I would not hear another sound pass her lips…until I strip the fat from her.


Alphinaud: Here we are, home at last. I must say, the journey passed more quickly than I had expected.

Alisaie: That would be due to the absence of otherworldly interference, I expect.

Alphinaud: I-I should be glad if we did not speak of that unpleasantness again!

Alphinaud: Ahem. But in spite of all that and more, we return better for the experience─and, more importantly, triumphant.

Yugiri: Indeed. And with Doma freed of imperial oppression, it is only right that we turn our thoughts to the plight of Ala Mhigo.

Lyse: Well, I’m all for that, obviously, but I think you should go and see the refugees at Revenant’s Toll before doing anything else. They’ll be thrilled to hear what we’ve accomplished, and it’d sound best coming from you.

Yugiri: …Thank you. I shall do as you suggest.

[Admiral Merlwyb Bloefhiswyn, the leader of Limsa Lominsa, walks up.]

Merlwyb: I see I am not too late.

Alphinaud: Admiral! What are you doing here?

Merlwyb: The East Aldenard Trading Company informed me of your impending arrival. I have tidings I thought best to share with you in person.

Lyse: From Gyr Abania?

Merlwyb: Aye. The Alliance still holds the Wall, despite several imperial counterattacks. But we have been unable to press further into occupied territory.

 Merlwyb: Commander Kemp and his men, meanwhile, have made great strides toward rebuilding their depleted ranks. They have even taken it upon themselves to attempt some few operations…with mixed results, I am sorry to say. ‘Twas a complication arising from one such venture which moved me to seek you out.

Merlwyb: During a mission to transport wounded Resistance fighters to the Rising Stones, Krile Baldesion was taken prisoner.

 Alphinaud: Krile!? Do they know where she is being held?

Merlwyb: They do not. But your comrades were informed at once, and I am told Thancred is in Gyr Abania looking for her as we speak.

 Alphinaud: How could this have happened…? We must seek out Thancred without delay!

Alphinaud: …Nay. Krile taught me better than that. It would be unwise to act without first acquiring a full understanding of the situation…

Alphinaud: Thank you for informing us. Tired though we may be, we must make haste to Castrum Oriens. Pray excuse us, Admiral, Lady Yugiri.

[At Castrum Oriens]

Thancred: There you are! You have heard the news?

Alisaie: In broad strokes from Admiral Bloefhiswyn. What happened?

Thancred: Krile and a squadron of Resistance fighters were escorting Y’shtola and several other wounded to the Rising Stones for further treatment when they were ambushed by imperial forces.

Thancred: Arenvald and his men fought valiantly, but in the chaos─

Arenvald: I will make no excuses! We failed to protect her.

Alisaie: Do not be so hard on yourself. You protected Y’shtola and the others, did you not? Tell us about the attack.

Arenvald: It was the Skulls. They knew a path across the Wall we hadn’t found. We thought we were safe once we reached the Black Shroud. <sigh> We weren’t expecting an ambush…

Arenvald: During the fighting, I caught a glimpse of their leader’s memories. It was all planned.

Alphinaud: The advantage of having a Walker in the field.

Arenvald: I’m not as strong in the Echo as Auric is, of course. Half the time, it’s enough to knock me on my arse, like I’ve taken a dose of concentrated aether…

Lyse: So you walked in Fordola’s memories. What did you see?

Arenvald: A woman promised the world─education, training, citizenship─all that and more if she but sold her soul. A traitor to her people, a pretender to her masters…

Arenvald: …It was Zenos himself that gave the order. Told her to return with Krile Baldesion─alive.

Thancred: Our agents have been carefully monitoring imperial communications since the attack, but have yet to intercept any transmissions making reference to Krile or her current whereabouts.

Alphinaud: If their orders were to bring Krile back alive, we can save her if we move quickly enough.

Thancred: As you say, time is of the essence, which is why I intend to slip past enemy lines and see what information I can uncover on my own.

Thancred: In the meantime, it is up to you and our allies to command the imperials’ undivided attention. Lots of shouting and explosions and so forth. Keep them distracted, and I will find her.

Alphinaud: …Very well. I wish I could do more to aid you, but I understand.

 Thancred: Commander Kemp is on his way to the castrum as we speak for a meeting with General Aldynn. If you hurry, you could find him on the road, and discuss the situation beforehand.

Lyse: I think Auric and I are going to go and see Conrad like he suggested. You all wait here.

[At the river bank]

Conrad: Well, well! Isn’t this a pleasant surprise! It fills my heart with joy to see you two hale and healthy.

M’naago: Welcome home, Lyse, Auric. I’m sure you’ve heard about Krile by now…

Lyse: That’s why we’re here. I’m still not sure what to think about it…but we’ll save her. We’ll definitely save her somehow.

Conrad: Aye, I’ve no doubt that you will. You look stronger for your time in the Far East, lass, and that’s good news for Krile.

Lyse: I’d like to think so…But enough about me─how is everything with you and the Resistance?

Conrad: Better than when you last saw us, and no mistake. Arenvald’s been a godssend. Him and M’naago and all the other youngbloods have achieved so much in such a short time.

 

Conrad: We’ve been blessed to receive the support of the Flames’ Ala Mhigan Brigade, who’ve been instrumental in freeing our countrymen from labor camps throughout Gyr Abania, as well as some political prisoners from the city proper, believe it or not.

Conrad: Together with the refugees returning from Ul’dah and elsewhere, we’ve had no shortage of able-bodied men and women eager to join the cause.

Lyse: I knew you wouldn’t stop fighting, even after what happened at the Reach.

Conrad: Force of habit, I suppose. Though we’ve come a long way, we still have far to go. But we’ll fight for every ilm, and sooner or later, we’ll get to Ala Mhigo.

Conrad: But listen to me prattling on when we should be making haste to Castrum Oriens. There’s no point you telling me everything now when you’ll only have to say it all again for the Flame General’s benefit.

Lyse: You’re right. I’ll go on ahead and tell the others that you’re not far off.

[Back in Castrum Oriens]

Pipin: You have spoken with Thancred, then? Good. Take heart─if anyone can track her down, it’s him.

Pipin: I believe I hear Commander Kemp’s party approaching. If you are ready to address Father and the others, let us be about it.

Raubahn: There you are─and there is Commander Kemp, I see. I know you are eager to speak of our next move, but we would first hear more of your last. Tell us of your deeds in Doma.

Pipin: Pray join me in welcoming our Scion allies, but recently returned from their mission to the Far East. We have been most eager to hear a firsthand account of your time there, eventful as we understand it was.

Alisaie: Very well, allow me…

[Alisae fills everyone in.]

Raubahn: …Such victories are rarely won without sacrifice. But the prize is worth the price. Doma free, after all these years.

Conrad: Bloody hells… Flooding their own castle for a better chance at victory…We could learn a thing or two from that lad.

 Pipin: Our agents report a flurry of communications between Garlemald and Ala Mhigo in recent days. ‘Tis plain they are in the midst of deliberating their response to the Doman uprising.

 Raubahn: Good. Every imperial unit in occupied territory will be on the lookout for civil unrest. The fear of leaving critical locations undefended will make commanders think twice about committing their forces─giving us a chance to seize the initiative.

 Conrad: We have a chance, aye─mayhap the last one we’re ever gonna get.While we’ve done our best to rebuild the Resistance, the imperials have only increased their efforts to root out sympathizers.

Conrad: If we keep on playing for smaller prizes, it’s only a matter of time before they crush us again. And that we won’t come back from.

Pipin: A swift advance seems best for all concerned. Not least poor Mistress Krile.

 Raubahn: Then let us waste no more time. The campaign for Ala Mhigan liberation begins now!

Raubahn: Our first objective will be to capture Castellum Velodyna. Take the bridge, and the whole of the Fringes will be ours. From there, we can push east towards the Peaks.

 Raubahn: I name this operation Rhalgr’s Beacon. For as Rhalgr once sent His star to guide our ancestors to these lands, so too shall it see us home!

Raubahn: The success of this operation is paramount. So long as the Empire holds Castellum Velodyna, the main host cannot advance.

Raubahn: Zenos knows this, which is why he has ordered Fordola and her men to see to the bridge’s defense.

Lyse: So we’ll get to fight the Skulls again…

Raubahn: The Butcher is not to be underestimated. She is decisive, ruthless, and feared by foes and friends alike. But we have a plan to defeat her.

Raubahn: First, we send an Alliance force down the main road, signaling our intention to mount an all-out assault. The garrison will muster their forces and prepare for a protracted battle…

Raubahn: However, they will soon find that we are ill prepared for their counterattack. Our men will begin to break ranks and flee.

Conrad: I see… Show them your backs and give them a target too tempting not to pursue.

Raubahn: Aye, Fordola is too aggressive not to press the advantage. She will order her men to give chase.

Raubahn: We lure them as far as East End, where the commanders will rally their forces and attempt to hold their ground. If all goes to plan, we should be able to keep the greater part of their garrison occupied.

Conrad: …Leaving my comrades and I to tackle the bridge’s remaining defenders. Very clever, I’m sure. But what are we to do if the imperials smell a rat and return before we’ve taken the place?

Raubahn: I don’t need you to take Velodyna, Commander Kemp. All I need is for you to fly your flag from its tower.

Alphinaud: You mean to trick them into believing that the bridge has fallen!

Raubahn: Aye. We convince them Velodyna is lost, hit them hard with our reinforcements, and watch them go running for the hills.

Raubahn: Then, when the dust has settled, we regroup at the castellum. What say you?

Conrad: It’s a bold plan…but a good one. We’ll do it.

Alphinaud: In that case, we shall support both the Resistance and the Alliance forces.

Alphinaud: Auric, Lyse, Arenvald─I ask that you accompany Commander Kemp. Alisaie and I will remain with the Flame General.

Conrad: We will return to Rhalgr’s Reach and make our preparations. As soon as they are complete, we will join you in the field. Godsspeed!

[At Rhalgr’s Reach]

Conrad: In case you haven’t noticed, the flag flying above Velodyna is bloody massive. It’d take a dozen men to change it, and far too long besides. But there’s no need for all that─right, M’naago?

M’naago: Not so long as I have my griffin and a satchel of glamour prisms, no!

Conrad: Arenvald, you’re in charge of the runners between us and the Alliance. No linkpearls. Lyse, I want you to look in on the squadrons─make sure they’ve got everything they need. Everybody clear?

All: Aye, sir!

Conrad: All forces are to depart for Castellum Corvi when ready. That will be all. Auric, stay with me a moment, if you would.

Conrad: There’s a few men I’d like you to look in on personally. Each of them has lost people, and I can tell that it weighs on their hearts…

Conrad: There have been a lot of new faces since last you were here, so it’s best if I just tell you where to look. One’s an officer you’ll find in the Barber, another’s an older fellow who likes to pass the time on the shore of Starfall. The last is a fiery young lad from Little Ala Mhigo, who I’m told trains by himself by the river to the Fringes. You’ll know them when you see them. Come and find me when you’ve finished.

[Therapist of Light on duty!]

Swarthy Resistance Fighter: I say, if it isn’t the lad who helped me find the Ward I misplaced!

Swarthy Resistance Fighter: Ah, but there I go again treating you as an equal! It wasn’t till after you’d gone that one of my comrades pulled me aside and told me it was only the bleedin’ hero of Eorzea who’d taken time out of his busy day to help me!

Swarthy Resistance Fighter: Well, what is done is done. But know that I will fight with every onze of my strength in this coming battle, and the next and the next! Mayhap that will serve to repay the favor. Fare you well!

Hot-blooded Youth: …Auric, am I right? I doubt you remember me, but I’ll never forget you─saved my life in Little Ala Mhigo, you did.

Hot-blooded Youth: Wilred and the rest of us had got it into our heads that if we had enough crystals, we could summon Rhalgr like the Amalj’aa summoned their god. Thankfully, you put a stop to it.

Hot-blooded Youth: Ever hear about what happened to Wilred? Joined the Braves when they came calling, only to turn up dead one day. Never found out how or why, but I reckon it doesn’t matter. Dead’s dead, after all.

Hot-blooded Youth: But at least he died doing what he thought was right. And maybe that’s the best folks like us can hope for, eh? Not that I’m in any hurry, mind!

Ala Mhigan Brigade Officer: Wait, I know you! Lieutenant Seagard! It is an honor to meet you!

Ala Mhigan Brigade Officer: I was living hand to mouth in Ul’dah, but decided to enlist in the Flames after I heard tales of your derring-do. And now, as fate would have it, I’ve been sent here to join in the fight for my homeland’s liberation.

Ala Mhigan Brigade Officer: Ah, but this is no time to talk. I’ve got to prepare for the operation! Take care, Lieutenant! We’ll give those imperial whoresons what for!

[Back to Conrad]

Conrad: You’ve had a word with the men I mentioned, then?

Conrad: As I’m sure you noticed, they’ve another thing in common aside from tragedy:  you’ve touched each of their lives in one way or another. But that’s not the reason I wanted you to speak with them.

Conrad: A man who’s lived in Gyr Abania his entire life, who bore witness to the realities of the occupation for twenty unbroken years…

Conrad: A man who fled Ala Mhigo in search of a new life, who swore to serve another nation, only for fate to conspire to send him back here…

Conrad: A youth born on foreign soil, who never knew his parents’ homeland, yet nevertheless felt kinship with our cause…

Conrad: Three men, three stories, three reasons. Yet all belong to the Resistance. In growing larger, we’ve grown more diverse, and while there is good in that, there’s also the potential for strife and discord.

Conrad: It’d take a special sort to lead such men to Ala Mhigo, don’t you think?

[“Good thing they’ve got you.”]

Conrad: For now, aye, but not forever. And, to be frank, I don’t always know what to say to the ones who left, not to mention the youths.

Conrad: Nay, the Resistance needs a leader with a wider view. Someone who’s not lived their whole life in Gyr Abania; who’s known death and hardship but not been ground down by them.

Conrad: Aye. As you may have guessed, I’ve been thinking of asking Lyse. But it’ll be her decision in the end.

Conrad: I trust I needn’t say that this conversation is just between you and me?

Conrad: Good lad. Right, then─we’d best head to Castellum Corvi. Or what remains of it, rather.

[Castellum Corvi]

Conrad: We’ll lead the way while the other units launch their own separate attacks. Remember that we need to hold out until M’naago sees to the flag.

Conrad: Got your gear in order? Any moment now…

[Smoke billows up in the distance.]

Conrad: It’s begun, then.

 M’naago: Good. It’s the waiting that drives me mad. Standing around, knowing what’s to come. I’ll never get used to it.

Lyse: We’ve come this far, haven’t we? We just need to make it the rest of the way!

M’naago: Right!

[Arenvald runs in and gives a thumbs-up.]

Conrad: Looks like the bastards went for the bait. The bridge is ours for the taking!

Conrad: Now remember, M’naago:  I want you to make for the tower as soon as you see an opening and get that flag flying. We’ll see to the fighting.

M’naago: I won’t let you down, sir!

Conrad: Come, then! Rhalgr’s star shall burn bright this day!

Conrad Farsight: Quickly now! We’ve got to reach Velodyna before General Aldynn and his men are overwhelmed!

Lyse: Scouts, dead ahead! If they see us, they’ll warn the others!

Arenvald: Not if we kill them first!

[FIGHT!]

 Arenvald: That’s the last of ’em! Let’s keep moving!

Conrad Farsight: No sign of sentries. General Aldynn must have his hands full.

Arenvald: Then let’s seize the bridge and be done with it!

Arenvald: They left a token force behind. Nothing we can’t handle!

12th Legion Predator: Fire at will! Kill every last one of the savages!

Lyse: Cannons! They could use those to fire on Naago!

[FIGHT!]

Lyse: That’s the last of the cannons! It should be safe for Naago now!

 Fordola: Think you’re clever with all your little tricks? Think again! None of you are leaving here alive!

[One on one FIGHT with Fordola!]

Fordola rem Lupis: You may have survived the Reach, hero, but this time you won’t be so lucky.

Fordola rem Lupis: This bridge belongs to the Empire! I am not about to give it up!

Fordola rem Lupis: Hero or not, you’ll die just like all the rest!

Fordola rem Lupis: This is MY BRIDGE! You are NOT taking this from me!

Lyse: Naago made it! We’ve only got to hold on a little longer…

[Fordola is pushed back.]

Fordola: Gods damn you!

Lyse: No more running. No more hiding. Let’s finish this!

[A battle horn sounds.]

Lyse: Look! The flag!

[M’naago has gotten the Ala Mihgo flag glamour in place and stand atop the bridge sounding her battle horn.]

Conrad: The bridge is ours! Ala Mhigo, Ala Mhigo, Ala Mhigo!

Fordola: Stand your ground! It’s not over yet!

[Fordola throws a smoke bomb and her patrol withdraws.]

Lyse: Damn it!

Conrad: Let them go, Lyse! We’ve done what we came here to do. That’s enough for now.

[Elsewhere in the Fringes, the Imperial and Alliance forces are engaged in heavy fighting. 

Then they hear the battle horn sound and look up to see the flag of Ala Mhigo flying over Castellum Velodyna.]

Imperial Pilus Prior: Velodyna is fallen!? Impossible!

Raubahn: We have them on the run! Forward! No mercy!

Imperial Pilus Prior: Regroup, regroup… We have to regroup! All units─ Fall back!

[As the Imperials retreat, Raubahn smiles up at the Ala Mhigan flag flying in the wind.]

Skull Swordsman: Commander! The 4th Cohort has been routed! We’ll be at the mercy of the enemy’s reinforcements if we don’t fall back now!

Fordola: Idiot! We have the stronger force by far! Don’t be taken in by their tricks! Or would you rather tell Zenos you lost to this rabble!?

Skull Swordsman: No, but if the snakes betray us in the confusion, we’ll have no way out! I’m begging you, Commander─give the order, or we’ll all die here!

Fordola: …As common traitors who drank of muddied waters. For all the good it did us.

Fordola: Skulls, with me! The day is theirs, and so is this bastard bridge. Someone bring the snake!

Lyse: …I suppose. It’s our first victory, isn’t it? And that has to be worth something.

Lyse: It’s a shame Fordola got away, but we did what we came here to do.

Lyse: I have to remind myself it’s just the first step…but it’s a big one. We’re going to take it back…all of it─one ilm at a time if we have to!

Conrad: There’s still a chance that some imperials are holed up inside the castellum. We’ll need to search it top to bottom to be sure it’s safe.

Conrad: In the meantime, I want you to rendezvous with the main host. Keep your weapons at the ready─there’s a chance you might come face-to-face with soldiers on the run en route.

Conrad: On second thought, it might be prudent for you to do a preemptive sweep of the region for soldiers that have gone to ground. We shouldn’t afford them any time to regroup and launch a counterattack.

Conrad: When you’ve judged your work to be done, report to General Aldynn in Bittermill.

[At Bittermill]

Raubahn: Lieutenant. All’s well at the bridge?

Raubahn: Good, good. The fighting has died down here too, as you can see.

Raubahn: Pipin left but a moment ago with a contingent of troops to occupy Velodyna. If and when the imperials return, they’ll find us dug in behind their own walls.

Alphinaud: I could not have hoped for a better outcome, General. Splendidly done.

Raubahn: Let’s not get ahead of ourselves. It’ll take more than one castellum to turn the tide.

Raubahn: My men and I will deal with the remaining enemy forces. Scions, I bid you return to Commander Kemp and his men.

Alphinaud: Delight not overmuch in victory─not when there are battles left to fight…

Alphinaud: Our work here is finished. Our Resistance allies are waiting.

[At Castellum Velodyna]

Conrad: Back so soon? I suppose the General and his men had matters well in hand.

Conrad: The vice marshal and his men showed up not long after you left. If the gods are good, there’ll be no one left to fight…

Conrad: I know you’re not one for waiting, but if you’ll bear with us─

Resistance Guard: Commander Kemp! Marshal Tarupin reports that their sweep of the castellum’s interior has been completed!

Conrad: So it’s finally over, eh? Pray extend to him my deepest thanks.

Alisaie: It’s official, then. Castellum Velodyna is well and truly ours. Mayhap this calls for─ Wait, where is M’naago?

Conrad: She took her bird and flew off towards the Peering Stones─the village of the M tribe, where she was born.

Conrad: I doubt that the imperials who fled Velodyna had a mind to give them trouble on their way back east, but she was nevertheless worried, so I gave her leave to go and see that her people were safe.

Alphinaud: Though I pray you are right, ‘twould be best if M’naago were not alone if she should encounter the enemy.

Lyse: Agreed! Let’s all go to the Peering Stones and make sure that everything is all right.

Conrad: If that is your wish, then I’ve no objection. Just let the guard know when you wish to cross.

[Near the Peering Stones]

Lyse: The path to the village is through a tunnel just east of here. Follow me!

[In the M tribe village]

M’naago: Ah, you’ve come. Welcome, friends, to my village. My home.

Alphinaud: How fare your people?

M’naago: Good, all things considered. Better than the Ananta, at any rate…

They’ve sent an emissary. I’ll take you to her.

Lyse: We’re here to help. Will you tell us what happened?

Vira Battlemaid: Aye. It began with a quarrel between the imperials and the Qalyana.

M’naago: The Qalyana are another Ananta tribe─the strongest and the most influential.

M’naago: Unlike the Vira, they want no part of our troubles. They swore fealty to the Empire and were content to remain within their borders.

Vira Battlemaid: Jussst ssso. The Qalyana forsssook their pride and the fight, and yielded to Garlemald long ago.

Vira Battlemaid: But then a new commander was sssent to hold the black bridge. She demanded the Qalyana sssurrender a hossstage, thisss Butcher.

Lyse: Fordola. It doesn’t make sense, though… The Vira are the ones working with the Resistance. Why would she threaten the Qalyana?

Vira Battlemaid: Because she is ignorant, like all imperials. She knows not the difference between Qalyana and Vira, nor does she care to learn.

Alphinaud: I see. All Fordola knew for sure was that the Resistance would come from the west. She reasoned, therefore, that if the Ananta on the east bank turned their coats, she would be trapped. I take it the Qalyana had no choice but to oblige her.

Vira Battlemaid: No, they did not. The imperials left with the Qalyana broodmother’s own daughter, Anamika.

Vira Battlemaid: Long days and nightsss she looked out on the black bridge, weeping for her child. Until you came.

Vira Battlemaid: The broodmother knew at once which way the winds would blow. She and her warriors met with the fleeing imperials in the road and demanded that her daughter be returned.

Lyse: Bad idea… Fordola’s not the kind to take threats lying down.

Vira Battlemaid: You know her well. The Butcher turned her blade to Anamika and bade the Qalyana move aside.

Vira Battlemaid: But the broodmother would not yield.

Alisaie: I know where this is going…

Vira Battlemaid: The Qalyana sssurrounded the imperials, one of whom, whether out of fear or ssstupidity, cut the child down. There was naught that could be done.

Alisaie: What madness…

Vira Battlemaid: The true madnesss was yet to come. For in her dessspair, the Qalyana broodmother cried out for her daughter to be ressstored to life. She bessseeched Sri Lakshmi’s intercession.

Alphinaud: She summoned a primal, then and there?

Vira Battlemaid: That she did, if only for an inssstant. Bereft of courage and honor, the broodmother sssought sssolace in her faith.

Vira Battlemaid: The imperials fled in terror at the sssight of the goddesss, abandoning these lands to the Ananta…

 Vira Battlemaid: Now the Qalyana bid usss make pilgrimage, to pay proper ressspectsss. Yet though we Vira revere Sri Lakshmi as the holiessst of the holy, we will not prossstrate ourssselves before Her.

Alisaie: And so you turned to us.

Vira Battlemaid: Aye. All who have fought with the Resissstance have heard tell of the warrior. The eikon-ssslayer.

 Alphinaud: I believe we have heard enough. Inconvenient though the timing may be, if a primal has indeed been summoned, we can scarce afford to ignore it. We must needs discuss how best to resolve this situation.

Alphinaud: Ahem. At the risk of sounding hopelessly naive…there may yet be a way to avoid a violent confrontation.

Alphinaud: In the past, I fear I have been rather too willing to accept that we have no other recourse than to risk our lives─or rather your life─to address these threats.

Alphinaud: Yet the primals we have faced thus far have demonstrated a variety of temperaments and objectives. Ravana may delight in battle, but Ramuh would sooner keep to the forests with his children.

Alphinaud: Ere we decide to challenge Sri Lakshmi, it would seem wise to learn more of her nature from those who summoned her unto this world.

Vira Battlemaid: If that is your will, then ssso be it. To the north will you find our village. Sssarisha shall unfold all.

Alisaie: We shall leave at once. M’naago, can you inform our comrades at the bridge of what happened?

M’naago: Of course. Be safe, my friends.

[In Vira Nilya]

Sarisha: …We do not often receive guestsss. What is the purpossse of your visit?

Alphinaud: Greetings and well met. We are the Scions of the Seventh Dawn, and we come seeking Sarisha of the Vira. You are she, are you not?

Alphinaud: You have petitioned us for aid and succor, and we intend to provide them, but we would first learn more of Sri Lakshmi, that we might better understand the nature of the threat she poses to you.

Sarisha: A sssimple requessst, and one which I shall gladly oblige.

Sarisha: In the beginning was Sri Lakshmi. We were created in Her image─daughters blesssed with Her beauty. Her breath became ours; Her ssserenity our sssolace. There is naught She would not give.

Alphinaud: Hm. ‘Twas the Qalyana broodmother’s desire to bring about her daughter’s resurrection which first called forth Sri Lakshmi from the aether. That being the case, I rather doubt the goddess will be spoiling for a fight.

Alisaie: That would depend. The primal’s motives will have been colored by the summoner’s state of mind─namely, that of a grieving mother who had just borne witness to her daughter’s murder. Though she apparently craved a miracle, she may also have harbored thoughts of vengeance. Moreover, the Qalyana’s conception of Sri Lakshmi may differ from that of the Vira.

Sarisha: Thisss is true. The Vira and the Qalyana do indeed regard the Lady of Blisss in different ways.

Sarisha: To the Vira, Sri Lakshmi embodies freedom. She would not sssuffer Her daughters to be bound to another’s will. And ssso we ssstand with the Resissstance againssst the Empire, and give our lives for the cause.

Sarisha: To the Qalyana, however, She embodies transsscendental beauty, which they ssstrive to create through their craft. To shape cryssstal is lesss art and more ritual─a sssacred duty wherein each tribute is imbued with a fragment of the sssoul.

Sarisha: The imperials do not interfere with thisss holy work, and ssso the Qalyana were content to turn inward and ignore our plight.

Alisaie: …Until reality asserted itself, and they summoned a primal. A fever dream to soothe their aching hearts.

Lyse: But surely they can see that it won’t do any good! The imperials will still rule these lands. Nothing will change!

Alisaie: The Ananta will. The Qalyana bade the Vira make pilgrimage to “pay proper respects,” remember? Those who do not wish to partake of their primal’s bliss will be made to do so.

Lyse: Not while we’re around they won’t!

Sarisha: Though our beliefsss are not the sssame, we are ssstill kin to the Qalyana. Will you help them to sssee reason?

[“You can count on us.”]

Sarisha: Then we shall, for without you we may be powerlesss to ssstop them.

Alisaie: If we do not act quickly, more lives will be lost, more families torn apart…more children made to suffer.

Lyse: Then it’s settled─we’re going to find that primal and put an end to this!

Sarisha: My sssister Vajra will guide you to Djanan Qhat…and I shall pray for your successs.

Vajra: Well met, Ssscions. I am Vajra. She who shines bright and unbroken.

Vajra: I ssstand ready. We leave upon your command.

[Near Djanan Qhat.]

Vajra: Djanan Qhat. The path leads to an entrance above.

Vajra: Within is an aetheryte. You must use it to enter.

Alphinaud: Understood. With me, everyone!

[We reach the aetheryte and use it. We watch from hiding as the Qalyana Broodmother, Shanti, beseeches her goddess.]

Shanti: Why, Missstresss… Why does my Anamika ssslumber ssstill?

Lakshmi: Look thee on her face, sssupplicant. Thy prayer hath been anssswered.

Lakshmi: Flesh sssundered hath been made whole. Blood ssspilt runneth through her veins. Breath ssstolen filleth her breassst.

Shanti: But she hears not her mother’s words, nor sssees her mother’s face! She…she is sssilent…and empty…

Lakshmi: Only the vesssel may be remade. Not so the flame which flickered within. Her soul hath been scattered to the four winds.

[Alisaie jumps up and moves out of her hiding spot.]

Alisaie: Now do you see her promises for what they are!?

Alphinaud: Alisaie! Have you gone mad!?

Alisaie: Mayhap I have! But I refuse to stand by and watch yet another tragedy unfold!

Shanti: Who intrudes upon thisss sssacred ground!? Imperials thirsssting for blood!?

Alisaie: No! We come not to shed blood but to save you from the false god who would lead you astray!

Alisaie: I understand how you feel, I do. You loved her with all your heart, but when the moment came, you still couldn’t save her. The anguish, the anger…I know it only too well.

Alisaie: But I also know where this path leads! To embrace a primal is to condemn yourself to an endless cycle of despair. You will never know peace!

Lakshmi: A worm-eaten heart may find peace and ssserenity in ssservice. In beauty and grace. Thisss hath ever been my promissse. Naught elssse.

Alisaie: You tempt them with visions of things that can never be, and leave them bereft and wanting!

Alisaie: No illusion, however sweet, can change the fact that your daughter is gone. Remember her as she was! Do not suffer this piteous shade to tarnish her memory!

[Lyse runs out to join Alisaie]

Lyse: For every prayer that primal “answers,” it’ll demand payment in kind. Do you have any idea how many more Ananta will die to feed its hunger for crystals!?

Lakshmi: They would have thee sssuffer man’s ssspite and live in fear. Far better to dwell in my beauteousss dream than endure ssso ugly a reality.

Lyse: She’s wrong! We hate the Empire as much as you! If you’d just listen─

Lakshmi: Poor, misssguided children. I would ssspare you the tormentsss of thisss cruel and misshapen world. Come, basssk in my radiance. Let it fill your heartsss and free you from your burdens.

[Sri Lakshmi throws several balls of blue fire at our group. We dive for cover.]

Lakshmi: Abide in misery then, fools. The Ananta are more deserving of my blesssing…

Lakshmi: Leave these lands and my dreamers be. I will not warn you a second time.

Alisaie: I know, I know, it was stupid and foolish but…but I had to try, Auric. I had to.

Alisaie: I had to try…and I failed. So you have to fight. There is no other way.

[“Never stop trying.”]

Alisaie: It means a lot to hear you say that. It does. But it doesn’t make it any easier to have to ask you to face that…that thing.

Alisaie: We can but do that which is within our power. Lyse, Alphinaud, and I will go and seize their crystal stores. This will not happen again.

Alisaie: And you… When it is finished…we will be waiting for you.

[FIGHT!  Down with the goddess of beauty and love!]

Lyse: You did it again. You saved them. I just wish I could’ve been more help…

Lyse: So…it looks like the Ananta did have a mountain of crystals after all. Like every other tribe. Gods, we’re all such slaves to our weaknesses…

Shanti: You! You ssslew our Missstresss! She was our hope, our sssalvation! Is there no end to your cruelty!?

Lyse: Listen to me, please! I know that you’re only trying to protect yourselves because you feel frightened and alone…

Lyse: But that’s how we all feel, don’t you see? If we could just turn to each other for help instead of the gods, I’m sure we could find a way to live in peace!

Lyse: Your crystals are important to you, aren’t they? Reflections of your souls, right? Well, you shouldn’t have to sacrifice something so precious to a primal…

Shanti: Who are you to quessstion our choice? You who fight without fear? We wish only to live in peace, and if thisss be the price we mussst pay, then ssso be it!

Lyse: I know there’s nothing I can say to convince you. But I hope that one day you look back and see we only ever wanted the same thing.

Shanti: Begone, damn you! Ssspare me your hollow words and leave me to mourn.

Lyse: I’ll go…but it doesn’t mean I’m giving up.

Lyse: Gyr Abania is our home too, and one way or another, we’re going to have to learn to live together.

Lyse: Come on. Alphinaud and Alisaie are waiting.

[Meanwhile, in the Royal Palace in Ala Mhigo]

Imperial Tribunus Militum: Ah, the savage returns. And with her tail firmly between her legs. Beaten by beastmen, I hear.

Imperial Pilus Prior: ‘Twas a shameful display, by all accounts. She may have curried the viceroy’s favor with her bold promises, but in the end, she’s just another plodding bungler like the rest of her kind.

Imperial Tribunus Militum: Strange, you would think him a better judge of character. Then again, I hear she’s not averse to a more physical mode of persuasion.

Imperial Pilus Prior: Hah, I thought she rose through the ranks rather quickly. But no longer. If only she had been content with her lot, she might have lived to see the morrow.

[Fordola grimaces, but walks past them and drops to one knee at the foot of Zenos’ throne.]

Fordola: Fordola rem Lupis, commander of the Crania Lupi, reporting as ordered.

Zenos Yae Galvus: …Why do you tremble so?

Zenos Yae Galvus: Could it be that the Empire’s Butcher is afraid? That she who walks with death is terrified of her own?

Fordola: I am terrified of dying having achieved naught. Gladly would I give my life to win a great victory on the battlefield, had I but the strength.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Alas, you do not. Indeed, you are weak. And born of this weakness is a blind fervor. A raging inferno which threatens to consume not only you, but everyone around you.

Fordola: Yes, my lord.

Zenos Yae Galvus: You were defeated by the Resistance on several occasions. You misjudged the Ananta and spurred them into summoning an eikon. Have you anything to say?

Fordola: I do not, my lord. My failures are my own. I am prepared to accept your judgment.

Zenos Yae Galvus: And that is very admirable. However, I’ve had enough of this dumb show. Give voice to that hunger I see in your eyes, or I will pluck them from your head.

[Zenos puts his hand under Fordola’s chin and jerks her head up so she has to look him in the eyes.]

Fordola: I…I want…

Fordola: I want to make them pay! All of them! Everyone who ever mocked or looked down on me─I want the power to make them pay!

Zenos Yae Galvus: …Hm. Very well.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Then I shall give you a chance. A chance to transcend your mortal limits. Assuming, that is, you are prepared to wager your life for such power.

Fordola: Transcend, my lord…?

Fordola: I came here prepared to die. Tell me what I must do.

[Zenos raises his hand to signal someone. An academic-looking Hyuran man in a caster’s robe and engineer’s monocle walks out. Could this be the mysterious Lord Aulus?]

Vajra: You have done us a great ssservice this day. Long shall my sssisters sssing the praises of the eikon-ssslayer.

Vajra: Let usss bear word to them of Sri Lakshmi’s passsing. Come, friends─to Vira Nilya.

[At Vira Nilya]

Sarisha: Ahh… The winds whissspered of your successs…and your eyes confirm their tessstimony. The Lady of Blisss no longer holds our Qalyana sssisters in Her thrall. For thisss we thank you.

Alisaie: Auric did the deed. We were but witnesses to his heroism.

Alisaie: However, I fear this is only the beginning, for there is no cure for that which drives the desperate to beseech the gods for salvation. Should they wish to use their crystals to summon Sri Lakshmi again, naught can be done to stop them.

Sarisha: We ignore our sssisters’ plight at our peril. Thisss we know. We shall endeavor to show them another path ssso that the day you ssspeak of never comes.

Lyse: We’re all in this together─Ala Mhigans and Ananta. We understand that. Hopefully, in time, they will too.

Sarisha: You and yours will ever be friends of the Vira. On that you have my word.

Lyse: We should be getting back to the Peering Stones. Thank you again, Sarisha. For everything.

[At the Peering Stones]

M’naago: Welcome back! Conrad and Marshal Tarupin came to render aid─but I hear that won’t be necessary…

Lyse: It won’t. Sri Lakshmi’s gone. Ah, but I should probably start at the beginning…

M’naago: Incredible. I don’t know what to say… If you hadn’t been there to stop her, who knows where it would’ve ended.

Conrad: You’ve saved a lot of lives, Auric. Take pride in that.

Pipin: It must be said that this is something of an unprecedented situation. Previous summonings were, to my knowledge, planned well in advance by a tribe as a whole.

Alphinaud: Indeed. There are several aspects of this incident which bear further investigation. In any event, the Qalyana’s supply of crystals must remain limited for the foreseeable future, and ambient aether levels closely observed.

Pipin: Understood. The Alliance will consult with the Resistance and the Vira on how best to enforce said restrictions.

Alphinaud: Thank you, Vice Marshal. To other matters, then. What news of the imperials?

Pipin: None─which itself is troubling. It seems as though the Skulls and the remainder of the garrison have fully withdrawn into the Peaks. We’ve seen neither hide nor hair of them since Velodyna.

Pipin: Regardless of their reasons, our path is clear. Father has decided that it is time to advance east.

Lyse: Finally!

Pipin: …He was also most emphatic that you be spared further duties for the present. You are to rest. It would not do for the Warrior of Light to collapse from exhaustion during the march.

Pipin: We may not be as strong or as quick as him, but we are soldiers nonetheless. We can deal with the imperials.

Conrad: Aye. You’ve earned this respite, so enjoy it. And the same goes for you, M’naago. You’ve been away from your family too long─don’t deny it.

M’naago: …As you say, sir. Thank you. We’ll make the most of our time here.

M’naago: Heh heh, looks like it’s up to me and mine to give you lot a proper welcome.

M’naago: My mother prepared a special meal for this occasion, and I have it on good authority that hers is the finest cooking this side of the Velodyna!

M’rahz Nunh: Honored guests, I pray you partake of our humble offerings as we give thanks for your many valiant deeds.

Alphinaud: Thank you, sir, for this warm welcome. We are honored to break bread with you and your family.

M’hahtoa: Come, come, eat your fill of our food, and drink deep of our spirits. There is more than enough for all.

Lyse: Well, when you put it that way─don’t mind if I do!

[Outside the house]

Lyse: She wasn’t kidding when she said her mother could cook.

Lyse: You know, seeing her with her family…I can’t help thinking of my own.

Lyse: How my father would come home from a hunt with dinner on his shoulder, and Yda would prepare it with herbs and spices… Our mother died when I was little, so she did most of the cooking…

Lyse: We didn’t have much, but we had each other. And that was enough for me.

Lyse: But they wouldn’t let us have even that. Theodoric, Gaius… Of course Father and Yda had to fight. I would have too, if I’d been older. But they didn’t have to die…

Lyse: It never ends, does it? They call us beasts…and they treat us like them. They push and they push and they…until someone pushes back. Until someone takes up arms or…or summons a god. A false god.

Lyse: If the Twelve are watching us, what are they thinking?

Lyse: What are they thinking when they see the strong hurt the weak? When people fight and die, and nothing gets better, and it just goes on and on and on…

[“You’d have to ask them.”]

Lyse: …I don’t think the gods listen to people like me.

Lyse: Thanks for listening. I know I was just rambling…but I feel better somehow.

Lyse: Who knows what the answers are─or if there even are any. Either way, life goes on, and we’ve got to…go with it. Sorry, that sounded better in my head. I must be getting tired. Time to turn in, I think.

Lyse: Tomorrow’s another day, eh? Let’s see what it brings. Sleep well, Auric.

[In the morning]

Alphinaud: There is something to be said for a home-cooked meal, is there not?

Alphinaud: We must cherish these moments, fleeting as they are. The fight will always be there, waiting for us to return…

Alphinaud: I trust you are well rested and refreshed, yes? Then let us return to the front.

Alphinaud: The greater part of the Alliance forces should have advanced into the Peaks by now, but I expect we will pass many of our comrades on the road east.

Alphinaud: There is a checkpoint along the way, as I recall, but we will need only to identify ourselves to the soldiers in order to pass.

[In the pass]

Alliance Recruit: Scions! A pleasure to have you with us again.

Alliance Recruit: You’ll be happy to hear we’ve taken Ala Ghiri, and have already begun fortifying it as our new base of operations in the Peaks. Give a shout to the lads as you pass, eh?


[Lyse narrates: “I remember how they laughed. Alliance and Resistance soldiers, eager for battle, trading jokes as we marched east towards the Peaks….Beyond this last line of defenses lay the Lochs and the city. Breaching it would be no small feat. But we beat the Imperials back, just like that, and we liberated a village. The first of many…”]


M’naago: As you can see, this part of the Peaks is much higher than the northern reaches, hence why the imperials built Specula Imperatoris where they did.

[Ed Note:  Specula Imperatoris can be roughly translated as “The Imperial Watchtower.”]

M’naago: See those three towers to the east? That’s her. Sits right on the edge of a cliff, so attacking from the north is a fool’s errand. From the south, on the other hand, she’s no different from any other imperial installation.

M’naago: You see now why Velodyna was so important, eh? Right, then. Come along─they’re waiting for us in Ala Ghiri.

[Ala Ghiri]

M’naago: Here we are. The new base of operations for the Alliance and the Resistance!

Raubahn: Ah, there you are!

Alphinaud: Greetings, General. I see you have been quite busy in our absence.

Raubahn: Less than you may imagine. The imperials fled at our coming, and we took the village without a fight.

Raubahn: Your timing is impeccable. We were about to discuss our strategy to seize Specula Imperatoris.

Alphinaud: Though we are fresh from the road, we should be glad to attend.

Raubahn: Good. Take a moment to gather yourselves, and join us when you are ready.

M’naago: Well, you heard the Flame General. Looks like we’ve got a meeting to attend!

Raubahn: That everyone? Then let us begin.

Raubahn: Ala Ghiri is ours, and for a mercy we took it without losing a single man. But we dare not grow complacent─Specula Imperatoris will not be so easily won.

Alphinaud: If I may, General─should we not pause to consider the imperials’ motivations? For Zenos to surrender a fortified settlement of strategic importance without so much as firing a shot is…inexplicable.

Raubahn: We searched the village and found no traps or other signs of sabotage. Suspicious though it may be, I will not refuse this gift from our enemy.

Raubahn: The path to Ala Mhigo is through the east─through Specula Imperatoris, and Castrum Abania. It bears repeating, however, that the latter is home to a massive cannon with unparalleled range and destructive power.

Pipin: Which means that we will need to strike Specula Imperatoris quickly, both to limit their ability to locate our forces in the field, and to utilize the installation as a shield against attack, as they would doubtless not risk damaging the towers.

Alphinaud: I see… Then we have no choice but to accept what we have been given.

Conrad: Aye, that’s the way of it. I’ve no doubt that Zenos has got something planned, but we’ll just have to deal with it when the time comes.

Raubahn: To the assault, then. The main host will commence a direct assault on Specula Imperatoris. During this time, I would hold the Scions in reserve at Ala Ghiri to deal with any imperial forces that may be dispatched in response.

Alphinaud: Understood.

Lyse: Wait a minute! We should be fighting with you and the Resistance!

Lyse: I understand you don’t want to rely too much on Auric after what he’s been through, but at least let the rest of us do our part!

[“…Don’t do anything too reckless, all right?”]

Lyse: I won’t. I promise I’ll do what Conrad says.

Alphinaud: …Mayhap it would be best if I accompanied you. Alisaie can stay with Auric.

Alisaie: Oh, go if you must. The two of us can take care of ourselves.

Raubahn: You have your orders. Dismissed!

[Meanwhile, deep within the Imperial Research Facility]

[Imperial scientists seal Krile in a suspension chamber of some sort, while Fordola lies disrobed on a table nearby.]

Fordola: My…my head…

Zenos Yae Galvus: Let us see…

Zenos Yae Galvus: So…she lives. Impressive…or merely lucky. Though that too may prove a useful trait.

Fordola: My lord…what have you done to me…?

[The academic-looking Hyuran man with the fancy glasses is here. It is indeed the aforementioned “Lord Aulus.”]

Aulus mal Asina: Though we Garleans are intellectually and physiologically superior in almost all respects, we lack the hereditary traits required for the reliable manipulation of aether─hence our unique inability to wield magicks.

Aulus mal Asina: This deficiency, for want of a better word, saw us subjected to decades of oppression by the lesser races, and we were eventually driven to seek shelter in the cold northern reaches of Ilsabard.

Aulus mal Asina: Fortunately, said region was replete with vast deposits of ceruleum, which proved instrumental in the development of magitek:  a revolutionary technology conceived to compensate for our disadvantage.

Aulus mal Asina: It was with magitek that we grew strong─that our nation became an empire. Yet ultimately, this was an extrinsic solution to an intrinsic problem. What I wanted was not a crude device to be used in lieu of magic.

Aulus mal Asina: Through modification of the Garlean genome, I argued that it might be possible to enhance a subject’s ability to manipulate aether, effectively empowering them to wield magicks. Alas, my theories were met with consternation in the imperial court. Only Lord Zenos, with commendable foresight and wisdom, deigned to support my research.

Fordola: …You gave me this treatment? But I’m not Garlean.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Ala Mhigan, through and through.

Zenos Yae Galvus: What you have been granted is far greater than mere magic. Before that lesser light, it is as a second sun.

Aulus mal Asina: I am informed that Ala Ghiri was recently occupied by the Resistance, and that an attack on Specula Imperatoris is considered imminent. This could provide an ideal opportunity to test her performance in the field.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Your…Skulls, was it? They have joined the garrison at the watchtower?

Fordola: …Yes, my lord. By your leave, I would rendezvous with them and lead a counterattack against the insurgents.

Zenos Yae Galvus: No. Even were you to leave now, you would not arrive in time.There is another duty I would entrust to you…

[Up above, on a second level of the room, a lone figure spies on the proceedings.]

Thancred: …Found you.

[Back in Ala Ghiri]

Alisaie: So full of fire and eager, weren’t they? Well, I wouldn’t worry too much. They’re strong and they have each other.

Alisaie: At least he spared me the trouble of having to speak up. I wasn’t about to let Lyse go alone…

Alisaie: We have a fair bit of ground to cover, so we should split up. If you come across any imperial soldiers, you know what to do.

Alisaie: Oh, and so you know─I sent word to Arenvald’s squadron. They are already searching other nearby areas, so we have allies in the event we encounter anything beyond our means.

[We chase a few Imperials out of hiding.]

Alisaie: Ah, give me a moment, Auric.

[Alisaie is on the linkpearl.]

Alisaie: Say that again, if you would….Hmm. No, maintain your distance for now.

Alisaie: …Understood. Keep me apprised of any developments.

Alisaie: That was Arenvald. The pair that was spying on us in the Fringes has followed us here…

Alisaie: What about you, Auric? Any trouble?

Alisaie: …And there I was thinking we might be due for some peace and quiet. Glad to hear you dealt with them.

Alisaie: I hope the assault on Specula Imperatoris is going well…

[At Specula Imperatoris, Raubahn and Pipin are in the middle of combat with the Imperial forces.]

Raubahn: Ho! You’ve improved, lad!

Pipin: Come now, Father. You lured the fool onto my blade, and do not try to deny it!

Raubahn: Our work here is all but done. What of Conrad and his men?

Pipin: They are for the main tower. The Skulls have offered fierce resistance thus far, but Conrad seems to believe he can convince them to lay down their arms…

Raubahn: Then we will tend to the stragglers down below. With me!

[At Castrum Abania]

[An Imperial soldier mans a bank of consoles. Fordola walks into the room.]

Fordola: Report.

Imperial Centurion: Enemy forces have overrun the lower facilities, and appear to be mounting an assault on the main tower. We have already received a request for reinforcements.

Imperial Centurion: A unit of legionaries has been mustered and is ready to depart. They await your orders, Commander.

Fordola: Stand down.

Imperial Centurion: Commander?

Fordola: Tell them to stand down.

Imperial Centurion: Commander, if I may! Our people─your people are still in there! They will be slaughtered!

Fordola: You think I don’t know that!? I want nothing more than to help them─to lead the bloody charge─but I have my orders!

Fordola: Lord Zenos said no reinforcements. He would have us use the main cannon to destroy the installation.

Imperial Centurion: What…kill our own soldiers!? You must be mistaken!

Fordola: Mayhap you’d like to ask Lord Zenos yourself?

Fordola: I thought not. Initiate the firing sequence.

Fordola: Wars are won on the backs of the dead. Theirs and ours. There is no truth but this. We must remain firm and resolute, and always, always do our duty. Now, give the order!

Imperial Centurion: Initiate firing sequence!

Imperial Elite: Aye, aye, initiating firing sequence! Release safety locks…deploy main cannon!

Fordola: Ansfrid, Hrudolf, Emelin…For us. For our people. For our future.

Imperial Centurion: I need you to confirm the target, Commander.

Fordola: Specula Imperatoris, main tower. Fire when ready.

[Fordola grimaces and puts a hand to her head.]

[The huge cannon is aimed and fired at the Imperial watchtower, striking a dead hit. There is a huge explosion.]

[Inside, Raubahn looks up as the watchtower begins to shake violently and rubble starts to fall.]

Raubahn: What in the seven hells!?

Pipin: Long-range artillery?

Raubahn: Those treacherous bastards… Their people were still fighting! Full retreat, now! Relay the orders!

Pipin: Understood!

Pipin: All forces, retreat! I repeat:  all forces, retreat!

[The Alliance forces begin to flee from the badly damaged tower.]

[Near Ala Ghiri]

Alisaie: By the Twelve, did you see that!? The main tower just collapsed!

Alisaie: You heard it too, didn’t you? It must have been the cannon at Castrum Abania. But that was an imperial installation, and their troops were still─

Alisaie: Dammit, no one’s responding! I don’t know if the shell is being jammed or…

Alisaie: We have to go right now! They need our help!

Alisaie: This way! There’s no time to lose!

[Alisaie takes off toward the watchtower, the Warrior of Light close behind. She stops at the gate.]

Alisaie: It’s worse than it looks─ H-He probably wasn’t even─ Pull yourself together. The gate. This is our way inside.

Alisaie: We need to find my brother. Right…now.

[We find Raubahn]

Raubahn: I’m glad you’re here, Lieutenant. In case it isn’t obvious, the imperials fired on us. On Specula Imperatoris.

Raubahn: I didn’t think they had it in them. To kill their own men just to kill us! Gods damn them all!

Alisaie: Where is my brother? Tell me where he is! I want to see him!

Pipin: He was in the tower when it was struck. But that need not mean anything. Our forces are still evacuating, and many remain unaccounted for.

 Raubahn: Alisaie? Alisaie, listen:  there are soldiers wounded and dying all around us─soldiers with families, just like you and me. They need our help. Do you understand?

Alisaie: …He’s right. I’ll take the north, you take the east.

[We assist the wounded.]

Wounded Serpent Soldier: Thank you. I think…I think I can manage on my own…

Wounded Flame Soldier: For a moment there, I thought I was bound for Thal’s great hall. Ye gods, what were the imperials thinking…

Wounded Storm Soldier: Just…give me a moment to let the world stop spinning, would you? …There. Ala Ghiri’s not far. I’ll make it. I’ll make it…

Wounded Temple Knight: Ugh… Everything hurts. I think I was struck by debris from the tower…

Wounded Temple Knight: Wait, I know you! Auric Seagard! Ward of House Fortemps!

Wounded Temple Knight: We fought together on the Steps of Faith. You saved my life back then…and now…

Wounded Temple Knight: I can walk. Thank you. A thousand times, thank you…

[There’s a shout. The Warrior of Light turns to look.]

Lyse: Conrad! Conrad, can you hear me!? Naago, put him down over there!

Lyse: Conrad! Conrad! Speak to me!

Alphinaud: It…it was all so sudden. Conrad had just convinced the last few Skulls to surrender, when…when we heard the bang, and…and everything started to shake…

Alphinaud: We carried the survivors to safety, but Conrad is… We have done what we can for him. All that remains is to pray.

Conrad: Ugh…

Lyse: Conrad!?

Conrad: Is…is that you, Lyse? Can’t…can’t see a damn thing…

Conrad: Well, that’s that, then. Time’s up.

Lyse: What are you talking about!? You’ll be on your feet before you know it!

Conrad: It’s all right, Lyse. I’ve lived long enough. But listen… I want…I want you to lead the Resistance in my stead.

Lyse: Don’t say another word! You’ll recover─we’ll recover! We’ll bring freedom to Ala Mhigo together! We’re not going to stop here!

Conrad: No…no, you won’t. Everything we’ve built, everyone we’ve brought together…I know you’ll show them the way…

Conrad: You’ve got it in you, Lyse. Not because you’re Curtis’s daughter, or Yda’s sister, but because…because you’re you. Because you’re you…

Lyse: Conrad…

Conrad: Lead them to victory. To freedom.

[Lyse is sobbing.]

Lyse: I will, Conrad. I will. I promise.

[Meanwhile, in the chaos of Castrum Abania]

Imperial Tribunus Militum: Next round! Double the charge!

[On a tower high above, Estinien looks down at the scene. His lance glows an unearthly blood red.]

Estinien: Come, Nidhogg. We are needed.

[The Crimson Dragoon leaps high and dives into the heart of the Castrum. There is a large explosion.]

Imperial Elite: That’s the ceruleum pipeline!

[Estinien stands on the parapet, fully visible.]

Imperial Tribunus Militum: Impossible! How can one man─ Shoot the bastard! Shoot him!

[The Imperials attempt to shoot the bastard. It doesn’t work.]

Estinien: Heh. My lance has slain far greater beasts.

Estinien: …You’re welcome, boy.

[He leaps away.]

Imperial Tribunus Militum: Notify all units─I want that intruder found! And get the engineers to fix my bloody cannon!

Imperial Tribunus Militum: The savages are coming!

[In Specula Imperatoris]

Alphinaud: We could have killed them. We could have walked away…

Alphinaud: But instead we tried to convince them to lay down their arms. We tried to seek a peaceful resolution.

Alphinaud: We showed them mercy, and this was their response. Fire and blood! This was their answer!

Alphinaud: Such crimes cannot go unpunished. They must not! Gods as my witness, there will be a reckoning!

Alphinaud: …Forgive me. Now is not the time for vows of vengeance. We must remain calm and rational and in control.

Alphinaud: The imperials have demonstrated a willingness to fire on their own. So long as we remain here, we are in danger.

Alphinaud: We three will see to Commander Kemp’s body. Find my sister and return to Ala Ghiri.

[Alisaie is nearby helping the wounded.]

Alisaie: There, that should suffice for now. Go on and join the others.

Alisaie: …Tell me you’ve found Alphinaud. Tell me he is all right.

[I found Alphinaud and he’s all right.]

Alisaie: Oh, thank the Twelve! I don’t know what I would have done… Though, saying that, what will the Resistance do without Commander Kemp?

Alisaie: Sorry─not here, not now. We should return to Ala Ghiri. Keep an eye out for any wounded who need our help on the way.

[On the way back to Ala Ghiri]

Wounded Imperial: <pant> <pant> …It wasn’t long ago I was trying to kill you and yours. I half expected you were about to slit my throat.

Wounded Imperial: To hells with this. I should be back home in Ilsabard, instead of taking fire from my so-called comrades.

Wounded Resistance Fighter: …Thanks, friend. Bloody tourniquet came loose and I was having trouble getting it back on. I should be fine the rest of the way.

Wounded Resistance Fighter: Oh, oh, bless you, kind─ Wait, is that you, Auric?

Wounded Resistance Fighter: I didn’t recognize you at first. Been feeling a bit dizzy. Must’ve lost a lot of blood. I…I can keep going. I can keep going…

[In Ala Ghiri]

Alphinaud: Auric. We have given over Commander Kemp’s remains for safekeeping. Later─I have no idea when─rites must needs be performed…

Alphinaud: For now, however, we must carry on. We must press forward. We must not give in to despair…

Alphinaud: All Alliance and Resistance units have now withdrawn from Specula Imperatoris. It is time we spoke with General Aldynn.

[We find Raubahn]

Raubahn: …These deaths weigh heavy on my soul. Commander Kemp’s most of all.

Raubahn: He was a wise leader. He was a patriot. But above all else, he was a good man who will be sorely missed. One of many lost this day. I ask for a moment’s silence to pray for the souls of the departed.

Raubahn: We have suffered a grievous defeat. But we can not and will not renounce this cause. The die has been cast.

Raubahn: Hold tight to this grief, this anger, and let it drive you forward. Let it be your strength and your shield when next you face the enemy.

Alphinaud: It will carry us far, General. Of that I have no doubt.

Alphinaud: Ere we take another step towards Ala Mhigo, however, we must first address the question of how to deal with Castrum Abania’s cannon. If the imperials are willing to employ the weapon without thought for their own soldiers’ safety, we may struggle to approach them.

Alisaie: A frontal assault is out of the question. We’d lose countless men before we even reached the walls.

Pipin: Would we? Recall that the imperials could have obliterated our forces had they kept firing, but neglected to do so.

Pipin: They had no strategic reason to cease fire, which begs the question:  why did they?

Alphinaud: …You suspect they were unable to fire the cannon again. Mayhap due to a malfunction?

Pipin: Or one of their officers found his conscience after the first barrage. Or a heretofore unknown Resistance faction chose that moment to disable it.

Pipin: There are many possibilities, but the fact remains that they stopped when logic dictated they continue.

Lyse: Then I’ll just have to go and see for myself if the cannon is still operational.

M’naago: Are you mad? Conrad put you in charge of the Resistance! We can’t risk losing another commander so soon!

Lyse: I know how you feel, Naago, I do. But I need you to understand…

Lyse: It wasn’t long after Papalymo and I arrived at Rhalgr’s Reach that Conrad first asked me to join the Resistance. And then he kept on asking.

Lyse: Every time I said no, I told myself it was because of the Scions. But even then, I knew deep down that it was an excuse. That I was still afraid of following my heart, because I couldn’t be sure if it was for me or for Yda.

Lyse: But then I met someone, on the other side of the world, who had struggled with the same worries. And as we traveled and fought together I saw him grow and become the leader his people needed him to be.

Lyse: And now it’s my turn to do the same.

Lyse: There’s not a lot of us left, and of the ones that are, many are still wounded. We have to make do with what we’ve got, and I’m the best-qualified. It’s as simple as that. But don’t worry, Naago. I’ll come back. I promise.

Raubahn: While I acknowledge Commander Hext’s right to carry out this mission, I see no reason why she should do so alone. Lieutenant, would you go with her?

[“Would’ve done it even if you hadn’t asked, sir.”]

Raubahn: Then it is settled. We will await your return.

Lyse: …Sorry to drag you into this, Auric.

Lyse: It may not be the decision Conrad would’ve made…but I’m not Conrad. I never will be. I don’t know what kind of leader he was hoping for, but right now, all I can do is be myself…

Lyse: If you don’t mind, I’d rather not wait around and have people try to talk me out of it. Let’s get moving. I know a good vantage point overlooking the castrum.

Lyse: Nyunkrepf’s Hope─the ship stranded on the rocks to the east of here. It shouldn’t take us long to get there. Oh, but there might be some ancient golems guarding it. Or that might just be an old wives’ tale. Either way, it’s worth the risk.

M’naago: Lyse…Commander…I pray you proceed with all due caution. Do not hesitate to call upon us if needed.

Lyse: To reach the ship, we’ll have to scale the cliff face. I’ll get some climbing gear and meet you there, all right?

[Out at the cliff, there’s a brief scuffle with a stone golem. Lyse then runs up.]

Lyse: Sorry to keep you waiting! I see you’ve met the golems. Looks like the old stories were true, eh? In a way, I’m glad…

Lyse: Right, then. Time to climb!

[We climb.]

Lyse: <pant> <pant> Whew! That took a bit more out of me than I expected…

Lyse: And here she is. Nyunkrepf’s Hope. The ark that one man made to save countless others from the flood during the Sixth Umbral Era.

Lyse: It’s comforting to think that there have always been people who cared this much about their fellow man─who accomplished such great feats that people couldn’t help thinking they must be made up. But the proof’s right here, isn’t it?

Lyse: I don’t just mean the ship, you know. I mean you. Long before anyone started calling you a hero, you were there for those in need. You did things for people when you didn’t have to─sometimes even when they didn’t want you to.

Lyse: It can’t have been easy, staying true to yourself. But we’re all better for it. Me included.

Lyse: I’ll never be a leader like Conrad. Or Hien. Or my father…

Lyse: But I can be a friend to you all, and I can fight by your side.

Lyse: I can be me…and that’ll just have to be enough, eh?

Lyse: Easier down than up, eh? Though not necessarily safer…

Lyse: Anyway, no time to rest! We need to convince the others to strike now, before the imperials have time to fix their cannon.

Lyse: There’s no time to lose, Auric! General Aldynn needs to know what we saw!

[Back to Ala Ghiri]

Raubahn: You are returned. I only hope you bring good news.

Lyse: We scaled the cliffs of Nyunkrepf’s Hope and spied smoke rising from Castrum Abania’s main cannon.

Lyse: I think Marshal Tarupin’s right─they didn’t fire again because they couldn’t. The cannon seems to have been disabled somehow.

Alphinaud: Then we must attack Castrum Abania at once!

Raubahn: Hm. It could still be a trick. But if it isn’t, we may not get a better opportunity.

Alphinaud: Bluntly, General, if it is a trick, it is an utterly baffling stratagem. Had the imperials wished to wipe us out, they could simply have kept firing.

Pipin: Be that as it may, we need not risk everything to seize it. I say we dispatch a small contingent to infiltrate the castrum and secure control of the weapon.

Pipin: If the enemy is preoccupied with repairs, we may be able to take them unawares. If, on the other hand, it is indeed a trick, our token force will prove an elusive target─and we will at least know the cannon is operational.

Alphinaud: Either way, it seems well worth the risk. But how are we to infiltrate the castrum?

Pipin: …In anticipation of a day such as this, men and women under my command have labored long to cultivate a network of informants throughout Gyr Abania─including Radiata.

Pipin: Radiata is home to many who hold menial positions at Castrum Abania and other nearby installations. With the aid of our allies there, I believe we can secure a route into the fortress.

Lyse: The Resistance will handle this. You may have recruited these informants, but they’ll be just as happy working with fellow Ala Mhigans. And at the end of the day, it’s our land─our responsibility. Let us do right by Conrad.

Alphinaud: I should be glad to accompany her, General─as would Alisaie and Auric, I am sure.

Raubahn: Well then. If you are all in agreement, I see no reason to refuse you.

Raubahn: We will make ready to march on Castrum Abania. Go, and may Rhalgr watch over and keep you.

Alphinaud: My apologies for speaking on your behalf. It would seem my sister’s forthright manner is rubbing off on me… I confess, my decision to volunteer was not wholly motived by concern for Lyse, nor less Ala Mhigo.

Alphinaud: …Castrum Abania is the largest imperial facility in the Peaks, you see, and so the likelihood that Krile is being held captive there is quite high…

Alphinaud: Dealing with that cannon remains our main objective, of course, but if there is even a chance that Krile might be rescued in the process, I would never forgive myself if I did not take it.

Alphinaud: So, to review: we are to travel to Radiata, where we will meet with a contact recruited by Marshal Tarupin’s agents.

Alphinaud: I took the liberty of reviewing intelligence reports while Auric and Lyse were away, so the settlement is not wholly unfamiliar to me…

Alphinaud: As the vice marshal indicated, the vast majority of the populace is employed as menial labor in either Specula Imperatoris or Castrum Abania. Perhaps as a result of this, the Resistance has long struggled to make inroads there.

M’naago: Aye, you have the right of it. They got a better deal than most Ala Mhigans─feeding off what scraps the imperials gave ’em. Damned if I know how Marshal Tarupin’s agents got one of them to turn his coat.

Alphinaud: I understand your disdain, I do. But I also understand their desire to look after their families by any means necessary…

Alphinaud: Our contact is a Roegadyn woman. She will ask us a question. After we answer with “courage,” she will know us as friends.

Lyse: “Courage.“ Right. Put together a squadron, Naago. We’ll need them soon.

Alphinaud: With me, my friends─and be ready for anything.

[At the ruined Specula Imperatoris]

[We have some skirmishes with Imperials on our way to Radiata.]

Alphinaud: Of course there were still soldiers lurking about… Fortunately, they were no match for Lyse. Come─Radiata is not much further.

Alphinaud: Of course, in light of our recent encounter, it would be prudent to proceed with caution and remain vigilant for imperial forces…

[On the outskirts of Radiata]

Lyse: Looks like it’s safe to enter. I don’t see any imperials…

Lyse: Hmm… I don’t see smoke above Castrum Abania anymore. Do you think they fixed the cannon already…?

Young Hellsguard: …Ain’t seen you around before. Takes a certain kind of man to walk into a place like this uninvited.

[“One with courage.”]

Young Hellsguard: …Courage, you say? Well, that’s in short supply these days. Better to keep your head down and go along to survive.

Young Hellsguard: Call me a coward too, if you like, ’cause I’ll not speak on it more─at least not here.

Young Hellsguard: Outside Radiata, behind those barricades over yonder, on the other hand…

Lyse: Hey. Was that who I think it was?

Young Hellsguard: Not followed, were you? Good.

[Lyse and the twins join us.]

Alphinaud: We are the Scions of the Seventh Dawn. Friends of Marshal Tarupin.

Stark Woad: Name’s Stark. Stark Woad. The rest you know, or we wouldn’t be here.

Stark Woad: This is about Specula Imperatoris and the cannon, isn’t it?

Alphinaud: Just so. Can you tell us what happened?

Stark Woad: Aye. I overheard soldiers talking while working in the mess. The ceruleum pipeline fueling the cannon was destroyed by an unidentified male insurgent, they said.

Alphinaud: One man single-handedly disabled the cannon? That beggars belief!

Stark Woad: Nevertheless, that’s what they said. It took a while, but they’ve finally put the fires out, and the engineers have been working day and night to repair it.

Stark Woad: Wish I could tell you more, but the incident had everyone jumping at shadows and afraid to say much more. To make matters worse, the Ala Mhigan help have been sent home indefinitely.

Lyse: So the cannon could already be fully operational…

Lyse: We need to sneak inside Castrum Abania to ensure the cannon is no longer a threat to our troops. Can you help us?

Stark Woad: Aye, that much I can do. I’ve pieced together a map of the interior over the years, and I know for a fact that there are multiple points of entry.

Alphinaud: Impressive…If we split into several groups, that may improve our odds of reaching the fire control center.

Alphinaud: We may be few in number, but I have faith that we can see this through!

Alphinaud: We have that for which we came. All that remains is to make our preparations.

Alphinaud: Auric─you and your ever-dependable allies will enter the castrum with my sister and I by way of the ventilation ducts leading to the hangars. From there, you will proceed into weapons research and unleash bloody mayhem.

Alphinaud: At the same time, Alisaie and I will create a diversion elsewhere, and in the ensuing confusion, Lyse and her unit will attempt to reach the fire control center undetected.

Alphinaud: If all goes to plan, our three parties will subsequently converge on this location, and together we will secure the cannon before finally notifying the Alliance that they are clear to attack.

Lyse: Sounds simple enough. I’ll go and brief Naago on the details.

Stark Woad: The rest of you come with me. We’ll need to deal with the magitek patrols before you can infiltrate the castrum.

[We deal with the magitek patrols.]

Stark Woad: Almost there, friends. Your point of entry is just around the bend up ahead. The last patrol should be here any moment.

Stark Woad: Once you’ve dealt with them, we’ll be clear to advance…assuming they keep to their usual schedule. Might be prudent to stand watch for a moment after, just in case.

[Last patrol down.]

Stark Woad: By Rhalgr, I knew you lot were good, but I never expected you to defeat them so swiftly…

Alphinaud: Auric is the finest warrior I know, and I should like to think we have learned something from our time in his company… Now─where is the entrance to the ducts?

Stark Woad: Right behind you. I’ve mapped the branches, so you should have no trouble reaching the hangars or any number of other places.

Alphinaud: Understood. Thank you again for your invaluable assistance.

Alphinaud: As discussed, Auric, we shall divide into two groups and proceed via separate routes into the castrum.

Alphinaud: Remember that our objective is to cause as much chaos as possible to draw the imperials away from Lyse and her men.

Stark Woad: If there’s nothing else, I’ll return to the Resistance forces and show them to their entrance. May Rhalgr guide you to victory!

Alphinaud: This is your last chance to make your preparations, Auric. When you and yours are ready, we shall begin.

[Dungeon level 69: Castrum Abania]

Alisaie: Are you all right!?

[Alisaie sees the dead final boss of the dungeon.]

Alisaie: Ah…I think that answers my question. We have accomplished our objectives as well.

Alphinaud: Lyse’s unit should be advancing upon the fire control center in the command tower. Let us join them.

Alphinaud: Lyse! Thank the Twelve you’re all right.

Lyse: And you! There’s the control center. Let’s hit them hard and fast. Ready?

[We enter the control center. Fordola is there.]

Lyse: It was you, wasn’t it… Wasn’t it!?

Fordola: Aye, I gave the order to fire.

[Fordola has a hand to her head.]

Lyse: It was over! The Skulls had surrendered! No one else had to die! And you killed them! Your own people! Your own comrades!

Fordola: You’re right. I killed them. Ansfrid, Hrudolf, Emelin, all the rest─trained and fought with every last one of them. Good soldiers to a man.

Fordola: I gave the order that led to their deaths…and I knew exactly what I was doing.

Lyse: But why!? Why would you do that!?

Fordola: They died so that all Ala Mhigans could live free. That was all we ever wanted.

Fordola: We made a promise that we would do whatever it took so that one day…one day the imperials would learn to accept us.

Fordola: But everything comes at a price. And if you haven’t got the means to pay, then you pay with blood.

Fordola: Service guarantees citizenship, but citizenship guarantees naught. It’s not enough to do your part, oh no. You have to run faster, fight harder, kill more and more and more─and only then will you be equal.

Fordola: That’s just how it is out here in the provinces. You buy your freedom with blood─there is no other way!

Lyse: Shut up! Shut your mouth! You don’t get to talk about freedom! You killed your own! They trusted you and you killed them!

Lyse: Murderer! Butcher! Traitor!

[Lyse charges Fordola. Fordola’s eyes flash red and she dodges Lyse with superhuman speed. Lyse tries to kick Fordola, and misses again – and again.  

Alisaie gets behind Fordola and tries to set her up for Lyse’s attack, but Fordola is too fast, and she strikes Alisaie down to the floor.]

Fordola: I know what you can do. I’ve already seen it.

[We fell the Imperial soldiers. Alpinaud rushes to his fallen sister.]

Alphinaud: Alisaie!

Fordola: Even so, the odds are against me…

[Fordola throws a smoke bomb, and disappears.]

Lyse: Coward! Get back here!

[There’s a hole smashed in the glass window. Lyse rushes to look out as Alpinaud starts to heal Alisaie.  Fordola appears outside the window on a small flying platform.]

Fordola: Hero! Lord Zenos invites you to join him for the royal hunt, to be hosted at the palace. You may bring your horde, if you like. All are welcome.

[She flies off.]

[Alphinaud looks up from tending Alisaie.]

Alphinaud: She’ll be all right, but we’ll need to carry her. Will you help me?

[Of course.]

Alphinaud: Thank you. Lyse, I leave matters here in your hands.

Lyse: Uh, right…

Lyse: Well, we did it. Castrum Abania belongs to us now…

Lyse: Naago and her people took Alisaie to Radiata to receive treatment. Alphinaud tells me she’ll make a full recovery…

Lyse: I know I should be happy. We won, and with minimal casualties. But somehow…it feels empty.

Lyse: We should report to General Aldynn. Krile wasn’t here, but who knows, maybe one of Raubahn’s men found something which could lead us to her. Can’t hurt to ask, anyway.

Raubahn: Lieutenant, Commander Hext. Fine work you did today.

Raubahn: After Specula Imperatoris, we needed a resounding victory like this. Thanks to you, Rhalgr’s star yet burns bright.

Lyse: I’m glad, I really am. But you should know that Alisaie was injured in the fighting…

Raubahn: …Regrettable, but I am pleased to hear that she will make a full recovery. Fordola’s parting words, on the other hand, ring less favorably in my ears.

Raubahn: But if Zenos wishes to invite us to his so-called “royal hunt,” then this bull would fain accept!

Raubahn: …What troubles you, Lyse?

Lyse: O-Oh, it’s nothing really, just that…we’re almost to the end, but we’ve still got to save Krile and do so much more…

Raubahn: We’ll find her soon enough. Pipin has his best men scouring the castrum’s archives as we speak.

Lyse: …

Raubahn: …Listen, Lyse. It will take time for us to fully occupy the castrum and prepare to advance into the Lochs. While we wait, there is something I would like to show you. Both of you.

Raubahn: After all, this may be the last chance we have to catch our breath before the final push.

Lyse: I don’t see why not…

Raubahn: Then come with me to Radiata. From there we’ll need to follow another road south.

[In Coldhearth]

Raubahn: Even after all these years, it’s still the same… Ah, but I’m getting ahead of myself. You deserve a proper welcome.

Raubahn: Lieutenant, Lyse─I brought you both here for a reason…

Raubahn: I wanted to show you this house. My house.

Lyse: You mean…this is where you grew up?

Raubahn: Aye. Not much to look at, is it?

Raubahn: Same could be said of the village. It was damn near impossible to live off the land, barren as it was─which is why so many of us traded our plowshares for swords.

Raubahn: Swords and uniforms, mind. We became military men. Tensions were rising between Ala Mhigo and the Empire, and there was always a need for more soldiers to watch the border. ‘Twas only a matter of time before the first skirmishes broke out.

Raubahn: It is a frightening thing to face magitek armor for the first time. But after a lot of trial and error, I found ways to bring them down. After a few victories, people even said I had a knack for it.

Raubahn: And then one day they hit us. Hard. I was wounded and sent home to recover. Back here…

[The Warrior of Light is struck by an Echo flashback. In it, he sees Lyse’s father Curtis in Raubahn’s village.]

Curtis: Will you remain silent for fear of the mad king’s vengeance? Of his eyes and ears in the shadows and his knives in the dark? You who call this “living” dishonor our nation─it is but a slow death!

[Curtis writes on the wall of Raubahn’s house.]

Curtis: Liberty or death. Liberty or death! If this be your creed, then raise up your hands! Raise up your voices! Together we will tear Theodoric from the throne! Together we will reclaim our freedom!

[A much younger Raubahn is in the crowd listening to Curtis.]

Curtis: Sent you home to mend, did they?

Raubahn: Aye, sir. Garleans got the better of us. The…the chirurgeons say I’m healing well, so it won’t be long now.

Curtis: Liberty or death, is it? Tell me, soldier:  what do you think those words mean?

Raubahn: We…we must needs be willing to die for liberty?

Curtis: Spoken like a true patriot. But liberty should not be the end in of itself.

Curtis: Liberty is the chance to build something better. A stronger, more prosperous home for our people. It’s not quick or easy work, and it is never truly finished─but if you neglect it, then sooner or later, you look up to find you’ve traded one tyrant for another.

Raubahn: Well, sir, I…I’ve never asked for much. Never wanted to live like a king─just wish it were a little bit easier is all. For me and everyone else. And I’m…I’m willing to die for that, if that’s what it takes!

Curtis: Dying is easy, soldier. Living is harder.

Curtis: Rest. Mend. Regain your strength. You’ll need it in the days to come…and mayhap one day we will need it too.

[The vision fades back to the present.]

Raubahn: Conrad chose you as his successor, Lyse, and I will not gainsay his decision. I have but one question to ask.

Raubahn: Liberty or death. Those were Curtis’s words, and his creed. Will you swear by your father’s creed before your comrades and the gods?

Lyse: Liberty or death… That’s all you can hope for in war. Father understood that…and you want to know if I do too.

Lyse: I swear to you, here and now:  I will fight until the end, be it liberty or be it death.

Lyse: But the freedom we win must be for every Ala Mhigan─even ones like Fordola, though they may hate us, and the Ananta, though they may fear us.

Lyse: We’ll fight and we’ll talk and we’ll find a way to make it work for all of us. Compared to all that, retaking our home will seem like the easy part.

Raubahn: Hmm. A good oath. Then there is naught else to say. You are indeed your father’s daughter…

[Raubahn speaks to the Warrior of Light in private]

Raubahn: Even a blind man could see that Lyse wasn’t herself. Not that I don’t understand.

Raubahn: To be thrust into a position of authority under such circumstances─to be made responsible for the lives of so many… It isn’t easy. And when you see your friend get cut down before your eyes, it only gets harder. I’ll wager she thought Alisaie was dead for a moment back there.

Raubahn: ‘Tis one thing to risk your life for a cause. But to risk that of another is a burden no soldier is ever truly ready to shoulder.

Raubahn: The fear, the guilt─it weighs on her. And that’s good. It will make her a better commander.

Raubahn: But first she needs to learn to carry it. To not let it break her. To remember that some causes are worth fighting for.

Raubahn: “Liberty or death.“ Her father’s words gave me strength once. Mayhap they’ll do the same for her now.

Raubahn: Right, then. I think I’ve said enough. The two of you can head back. I mean to stay a bit longer…

Lyse: …I understand. He’s been away for a long time, and he probably wants to be alone for a while.

Lyse: Let’s head back to Radiata.

Lyse: Wait… Am I the only one who feels like I’m being watched?

Lyse: I don’t know if it’s imperials or bandits, but I know there’s more than one of them.

Lyse: Let’s split up. You head northwest, and I’ll head northeast. Maybe I’m wrong, but I don’t think so…

[Who’s that over there?]

Suspicious Youth: Seven hells, he’s seen us! Sod it─dead’s as good as alive to the imperials!

[Easily dealt with.]

[Lyse has found some too.]

Lyse: They attacked you too, didn’t they? I…I had no choice…

Lyse: They’re Ala Mhigan─not even conscripts, by the look of them. Barely adults. In fact, some of their faces look familiar…

Lyse: Wait, I remember. They’re from Radiata! They must have seen us when we were looking for Stark!

Lyse: They probably thought the imperials would reward them if they captured or killed─

Lyse: Oh gods… Alisaie and Alphinaud could be in danger too! We have to get back to Radiata and find Naago!

[Back at Radiata]

M’naago: What’s all this about? You two look ready for a fight.

Lyse: We were ambushed by villagers outside of Radiata, and thought they might try to attack you too. Are you all right?

M’naago: Aye, we’re fine. The twins are at Stark’s. Alisaie was asleep, last I checked.

M’naago: I’m sorry, did you say you were ambushed by villagers? Not soldiers? Did they not see what we just did to Castrum Abania? Godsdamned fools!

Stark Woad: Lyse, Auric. We overheard you talking…

Stark Woad: The ones that attacked you. They were young? Less than twenty summers?

Stark Woad: Aye, I thought so. It’s always the young ones─the ones who have only ever known the occupation. They’re the ones you’ve got to look out for.

Stark Woad: See, the only decent work to be found in Radiata is for the imperials, and everyone knows it. Children grow up knowing it. They have it pounded into their skulls that the best they can hope for is to serve an imperial officer.

M’naago: Bloody fools! After everything they’ve seen us accomplish! They ought to be begging to fight for the Resistance, not against us!

Stark Woad: They’ve been living in the shadow of a castrum their whole lives. A few victories won’t change that. Aye, you get some who can’t wait to spit in a soldier’s eye, but they get beaten for their trouble, or worse…

M’naago: Even so…

Stark Woad: …And the ones that don’t fight back but refuse to beg, well, they just starve. Beat the dog that bites his master’s hand, and ignore the dog that refuses to do his bidding, see?

Stark Woad: In the end, the ones that learn to abide are the ones that survive.

Stark Woad: Now, you may say that’s all about to change, and I believe you. Many here do.

Stark Woad: But a young man or woman who grew up only knowing what he knows has got every reason to doubt. Remember that. Do what you have to, if it comes to it, but remember that.

Alphinaud: The sooner we liberate Ala Mhigo and bring an end to the occupation, the better. Only then can we show these youths that things do not have to be this way.

Lyse: …Only then will they know what it means to live free.

Lyse: We’re going to build a new home for ourselves. Together. A better home than they’ve ever known.

Lyse: I’ve been thinking. If Alisaie needs more time to heal, maybe we should move her to Rhalgr’s Reach.

Lyse: She can receive much better care there, after all. Our infirmary is probably the best place for her, short of sending her to Gridania.

Alphinaud: Indeed. And given what Mistress Woad has told us, I would rather she did not remain here.

Lyse: Then it’s settled. Naago, go and see about getting us a carriage and an escort. Alphinaud, you should get your sister ready for the journey.

Lyse: Auric, would you mind going on ahead and telling Orella that we’re on our way? I want a bed waiting for Alisaie when she arrives. Thanks.

[In Rhalgr’s Reach]

Orella: Hm? Do you require assistance?

Orella: Very well, we will make ready to receive the patient at once. Give me a hand, would you?

Orella: There. All crisp and freshly laundered.

Alphinaud: We’re here. Is everything in order?

Alphinaud: Right. We’re bringing her in.

Alisaie: Honestly, Alphinaud, you needn’t have gone to all this trouble…

Alphinaud: What can I say? It seemed a good way to discourage you from limping off to battle when my back was turned. Listen to Orella, please. You need your rest.

Alisaie: I know, I know…Any news of Krile? She’ll be cross if you make her wait too long. As will I.

Alphinaud: Hah. A chilling prospect indeed… I’ll find her, Sister. And I’ll fight twice as hard─for the both of us.

Lyse: They’re good together…when they’re not at each other’s throats. I miss that feeling…

Lyse: Auric─I have a favor to ask. Would you mind waiting outside for me? I won’t be a moment.

[I wait outside. Lyse reappears in a fancy flowing red outfit – the one from the trailer, in fact!]

Lyse: Sorry to have kept you waiting…

Lyse: Well, what do you think? I know it’s a bit old-fashioned…but in a traditional sort of way. Yda wore it whenever she could…

Lyse: Not that I’m pretending to be her or anything! Not again. It’s just…if this is the last battle we fight to free Ala Mhigo, then she ought to be a part of it.

[“It suits you.”]

Lyse: It’s nice of you to say so. Aaand a bit embarrassing. But mostly nice.

Lyse: Anyway, the real reason I asked you here was to sneak in a warm-up before the final battle.

Lyse: There’s this place I know where monks used to spar as part of their training. Care to join me?

[Sure. But the trailer doesn’t look right when it’s monk versus paladin!]

Lyse: <pant> <pant> Maybe we got a little carried away… But you have to admit that was fun.

Lyse: Thank you, Auric. You’re the best kind of friend─the kind that’s not afraid to knock some sense into you.

Lyse: Now that Alisaie’s settled in, it’s time we rejoined the fight.

Lyse: Though, actually…maybe you and Alphinaud should go on ahead without me. I need to talk strategy with the officers, and that might take a while…

Alphinaud: Ah, there you are. What was it that Lyse wanted of you?

Alphinaud: Ahahaha! A sparring match on the Destroyer’s very palm? I would have liked to have seen that.

Alphinaud: But she is right─we have lingered here long enough. I am ready to depart when you are.

Alisaie: Take care, you two. Don’t do anything I wouldn’t.

Alphinaud: And you had better not rise from that bed until you are given express permission to do so. Urianger will be paying you a visit soon, and he is already worried enough as it is.

Alphinaud: We have a long road ahead of us. Lead the way, Auric.

[Near Castrum Abania – the pass to the Lochs.]

Pipin: You are returned! How fares your sister, Alphinaud?

Alphinaud: Her rapier wit remains undulled─for better or for worse. Have there been any developments in our absence?

Pipin: I am proud to say that Castrum Abania is now wholly under our control. At present, we are taking stock of the enemy’s supplies and redistributing them amongst our men.

Pipin: Also, while sifting through the officers’ documents, we learned that a unit of Skulls under Fordola’s command passed through the castrum en route to the capital…with a single prisoner in their custody.

Alphinaud: Krile! It has to be her!

Pipin: In all likelihood, yes. You will be glad to hear that the tunnel leading to the Lochs has been secured by our soldiers and is now safe for travel.

Pipin: And one final piece of good news:  reinforcements from all four Alliance nations have arrived and joined the main host, which has established a new base of operations within the Lochs.

Pipin: Commander Hext should be arriving soon, yes? When she does, we will call a meeting to discuss the final stage of Rhalgr’s Beacon.

Lyse: Sorry for keeping you all waiting!

Alphinaud: An Ala Mhigan folk dress? How very fitting. And well-fitting, I might add.

Lyse: I wanted to do something for Yda. And myself.

Alphinaud: This is it. The last push. We’re coming, Krile…


[Lyse narrates: “I remember my father’s words. How they rang in my ears as we left Castrum Abania behind and looked out over the lochs before us. Comrades brave and true. They had come from all across Eorzea to stand with us. To stand against oppression and tyranny. Twenty years the Empire had ruled us, but no longer. Liberty or death. Liberty or death.”]

[We meet with Raubahn at Porta Praetoria in the Lochs.]

Raubahn: Ere we begin, I would say to you, as a proud son of Ala Mhigo, that I am grateful to each and every one of you for your part in this endeavor.

Raubahn: Now, to the heart of the matter. The enemy appears content to remain within the city walls and await the inevitable siege. Open conflict has been sporadic thus far.

Raubahn: Whether Zenos is biding his time until reinforcements arrive or attempting to bait us into a trap, none can say. We know better than to trust his word.

Pipin: Regardless, we can ill afford to present Garlemald with a chance to ready her legions. It would be in our best interests to press for a swift resolution.

Lyse: A long siege wouldn’t be good for the people in the city either. If food becomes scarce, you know who’ll starve first.

Raubahn: Just so. Therefore, I propose we commit our forces to an all-out assault. What say you?

[All the commanders nod in agreement.]

Raubahn: ‘Twould seem we are of one mind. Then let us proceed to the how of it.

Raubahn: The Immortal Flames will form the vanguard, supported by the archers and the conjurers of the Order of the Twin Adder, under the Elder Seedseer’s command.

Raubahn: Once the main host has cleared a path to the walls, we will bring forward the artillery of the Maelstrom and the Temple Knights.

Raubahn: I would have your cannons pound the gates, and punch a hole right through the middle of their defenses!

Lyse: What about the Resistance?

Raubahn: Your part will be to occupy the residential district and keep civilians out of harm’s way. The people are more like to trust their own.

Lyse: Of course. You can count on us!

Raubahn: Remember that there is a second entrance to the city proper there. If all goes to plan, we will have secured two points of entry.

Raubahn: Once both objectives are complete, we press on into the city, surround the palace, and hunt down Zenos.

Raubahn: As for the Scions, you will be held in reserve as an irregular unit until we have more intelligence on your captured comrade. Krile’s rescue will be your primary concern, but I daresay we’ll find a use for you once her freedom has been secured.

Alphinaud: Thank you, General. I pray we find her quickly.

Alphinaud: The stage is set, and the players are assembled. Eorzea has come at last to drive the invaders from her lands.

Alphinaud: What would Grandfather say if he were with us here today…?

Alphinaud: For all our other accomplishments, Krile remains in the hands of our enemy, and I find myself wondering if we─if I could have done more. Though we know now that she was taken to the city, we have found nothing which might tell us where she is being held.

[Thancred walks up.]

Thancred: You know, you could just ask me.

Alphinaud: Thancred! What have you learned?

Thancred: I shall spare you the particulars of my infiltration and simply state that I have seen her with my own eyes. She is being held within the residential district south of the city proper.

Thancred: I tracked her to the ruins of an old temple of the Fist of Rhalgr, within which the imperials have constructed a research facility…

Alphinaud: A research facility? What manner of research?

Thancred: Why…methods to imbue Garleans with the power to manipulate aether. In pursuit of which goal, their scientists have, I am sorry to report, performed many questionable experiments─on living subjects.

Alphinaud: What!?

Lyse: Calm down, Alphinaud. We’ve already been tasked with securing the Ala Mhigan Quarter. This just gives us a reason to do it faster.

Thancred: I entered and exited the facility by stowing aboard imperial transports, but that method is not suitable for a larger force.

Thancred: And it goes without saying that a direct assault on the rather substantial main gates would be ill-advised.

[M’naago walks over.]

M’naago: I think I might know someone who can help.

 M’naago: One of my men. He had an idea about how to get into the city─ Actually, it might be best if I let him explain it himself.

Cynical Youth: It’s been a while. I’ll not take offense if you don’t remember. Might even be glad of it.

Lyse: …Ala Gannha, am I right?

Wiscar: Aye. Wiscar’s the name. I was raised in the Peaks, but my mum grew up in the city.

Wiscar: Er…anyroad, I reckon we can get inside the Ala Mhigan Quarter by way of Loch Seld.

Lyse: What? How?

Wiscar: It was a story my mum told us which made me think of it. She was always going on about what life was like when she was a girl, see…how they used to have to boil the water from the well before they could drink it, since it was full of salt─

Lyse: They were drawing saltwater from the lochs! Which means that there must be an underwater tunnel or something.

Wiscar: Aye, that’s it. But it won’t be as simple as going for a swim.

Wiscar: The well was closed, see. Apparently, Theodoric decided one day he wanted to control the water supply and forbade water trading. So even if you come up through it, you’ll find yourself on the wrong side of a locked gate.

Wiscar: At the time, my grandfather, being an enterprising sort, befriended a guard and lifted the key from his belt. He made a copy and carried on selling water until the imperials invaded, and he ended up working at the Saltery…

Thancred: In short, we need your grandfather’s key. Assuming he still has it.

Wiscar: I’m certain he does. And I can take you to him. But it’ll be dangerous.

Lyse: Don’t you worry about that. We’re used to dangerous.

Lyse: Naago and Arenvald will assemble a squadron while the rest of us go and get that key.

Lyse: Let’s not waste any more time, then, shall we?

Wiscar: My mum said Grandad kept the key with him at all times as a lucky charm. If he hasn’t got it, then, well…

Lyse: Then we’ll cross that bridge when we come to it. Ready, Auric? We may have to deal with a few imperial patrols, or worse…

[Duty: The Key to Victory]

 Wiscar: The Saltery’s not far. Follow me!

 Wiscar: We’re here, but…this isn’t right. Where is everyone?

Alphinaud: Word of the Alliance’s advance has surely reached their ears. Mayhap they sought refuge elsewhere? We should search the buildings for clues.

[The pot is filled to the brim with salt from the lochs…]

[The barrel appears to have recently been filled with fish packed in salt. Someone was hard at work less than a week ago..].

[The lumber appears to have lain undisturbed for some time…]

[The crumbling masonry appears to have lain undisturbed for some time…]

[The magitek device suddenly springs to life, flashing brightly and emitting a shrill sound. It’s a trap!]

Thancred: All right, which one of you triggered the obvious trap!?

[Dude, it was the plot trigger. I didn’t have a choice. Shut up.]

Alphinaud: On your guard! Magitek drones approaching!

Thancred: Mayhap…half a dozen? Auric─keep Wiscar alive, would you?

Wiscar: Seven hells! I could do with some help here!

 Thancred: Now then, where were we? Ah, yes, looking for clues as to the whereabouts of our erstwhile water merchant and his key…

[In the wake of the ambush, you find a diary belonging to a laborer. The last entry makes mention of a plan to take shelter in the Sali Monastery…]

Wiscar: The Sali Monastery! That’s to the south. I’ll lead the way!

Lyse: Not after that ambush you won’t! It’s too dangerous! Auric, we’ll follow you. Keep your eyes peeled for more magitek!

Wiscar: The monastery is just past that gate. Keep going!

Thancred: Hm. Something tall, dark and imperial appears to be blocking the entrance.

Wiscar: Godsdammit! I don’t think there’s a way round…

Lyse: Then we’ll just have to go through him!

Alphinaud: Look! I think those two devices are shield generators!

Thancred: I will keep the machine occupied. Auric, be a good chap and destroy the generators before it rips my head off.

[Thancred seems confused about which of us is the tank and which is the DPS, but whatever.]

Alphinaud: ‘Tis done! See how it falters! Belabor the brute!

 Lyse: He won’t be getting up after that! Now, let’s find our man!

Wiscar: This is it. This is the monastery. They have to be around here somewhere…

[Wiscar spots a trapdoor in the floor.]

Wiscar: Watt! Watt! It’s me, Wiscar! Your grandson!

Watt: …Wiscar? By Rhalgr, is that really you?

[The trapdoor opens.]

Watt: …Oh, it’s good to see you alive and well, lad! But who are these other ones?

Wiscar: The Resistance, Grandad. My, er…my comrades-in-arms.

Watt: She told you all about me thumbing my nose at the Mad King, did she? Heh. Daft sods never caught me neither…

Watt: It wasn’t much, but it was my way of rebelling against his rule. Glad to see you’ve got higher aspirations. Here─make our family proud.

Wiscar: I will, I swear! Rhalgr as my witness!

Lyse: I was worried when he wasn’t at the Saltery. But we found him in the end.

Lyse: Now that we’ve got the key, it’s time to find that underwater tunnel!

Lyse: We’ll need to dive into the lochs and look for a tunnel leading beneath the residential district. That should be no problem for Auric and me, thanks to the Kojin’s blessing, but for the rest of you…

Thancred: I will have you know that I can hold my breath for ten minutes!

Alphinaud: …Hm. I think it best that I support M’naago and Arenvald’s unit.

Lyse: Oh, right. You can’t swim.

Alphinaud: I am aware of that, thank you! But it is neither here nor there, given that I lack both the Kojin’s blessing and Thancred’s preternatural lung capacity!

Lyse: Right, right. Of course. I didn’t mean anything by it. Nothing at all.

Lyse: So─Auric, Thancred, and me. Let’s head to the water’s edge.

Lyse: Alphinaud and Wiscar can rejoin the others and wait outside the gates for us to let them in.

[At the water’s edge.]

Lyse: This looks like as good a place as any…

Urianger: Ere you dive into the briny deep─

Lyse: Urianger! What are you doing here?

Urianger: Master Alphinaud informed me of your plan, and thus did I hasten to your side.

Urianger: When Mistress Alisaie unfolded to me the tale of her defeat, I was much intrigued by the apparent ease with which Fordola, a theretofore unexceptional warrior, defied my lady’s every attempt to do her harm.

Urianger: After some few days of deliberation, I subsequently contrived what I believe to be a solution to the problem of her preternatural prescience. ‘Twas in hopes of furnishing you with the fruits of my labors that I came.

Lyse: Wait, isn’t that Moenbryda’s─

Urianger: Her aetheric siphon formed the basis for my design.

Urianger: Should my hypothesis prove correct, you need but activate it in her presence. To say more would endanger the plan, for ignorance is your shield.

Urianger: It was…Moenbryda’s time. It is not yours, my friends. May you ever walk in the light of the Crystal…and return.

Lyse: We will─for you and for her.

 Lyse: Right! I’m going in. Follow me!

[SPLASH! Into the Loch.]

Lyse: The tunnel leads east. Thancred’s already gone ahead. Let’s not keep him waiting!

[Down the underwater tunnel, which opens up inside the Ala Mighan quarter, in the lower floor of a warehouse.]

Lyse: Whew! That was fun!

Thancred: Yes, yes. Tremendous fun. Who needs a beastman’s blessing anyway?

Lyse: I still can’t believe you managed to hold your breath the entire time. It felt like we were down there for hours!

Lyse: Anyway, it’s time we let our friends in.

Lyse: Once we head up these stairs, we’ll need to make our way to the main gates, which are…somewhere to the west of here?

Thancred: Forgive me for stating the obvious, but it bears repeating that until we open the gates, we three are on our own. ‘Twould be in our best interest to avoid guards and easily startled smallfolk.

Lyse: Obviously. But once our guests have arrived, we’ll be free to head towards the research facility where Krile’s being held as loudly as we like.

Lyse: Since you’ve been here before, will you lead the way?

Thancred: Of course. But I will move quickly, so see that you do not fall behind.

Lyse: Nothing left to say, then. Let’s get to it!

Lyse: All set, Auric?

[Duty: The Resonant]

Thancred: Follow my lead. Stay close and quiet.

Thancred: Wait! Patrol. Let them pass…

Thancred: All clear. With me!

Thancred: Sentry! Get to cover! I will deal with him…

[Thancred stealths over and downs the sentry.]

Thancred: And none were the wiser… Let us press on.

Thancred: Here we are… Ah, one more sentry. Give me a moment.

[Thancred 2, Sentries 0.]

Thancred: Auric, look for a lever or a winch! We will guard the rear!

[Got it!]

Thancred: Hells open, heavens weep…Alphinaud, can you hear me? The gates are open!

Alphinaud: Our friends are ready and eager to engage the imperials!

Thancred: Then let us leave them to it and head for the facility!

[Ala Mhigan forces pour in through the opened gate.]

Resistance Fighter: Remember the Reach! Remember the towers! Attack!

12th Legion Hoplomachus: Insurgents!? Here!? Sound the alarum!

[We dispatch the patrol with dispatch.]

Alphinaud: Hold on, Krile… We’re coming…

 Thancred: The Resonatorium is just ahead!

Alphinaud: They know we’re coming. Make ready, my friends!

[The door opens and Fordola is there with a few troops. Her right eye glows red with a strange geometric pattern, while her left eye remains normal.]

Fordola: I reckoned you lot would come, but I didn’t think you’d have the nerve to break the bloody doors down! Makes no difference to me, though─time to die!

[Fordola begins to charge up with an unearthly light.]

[Use the Aetheric Siphon to weaken Fordola, and defeat her in battle!]

Fordola rem Lupis: I can read your every move!

Alphinaud: Use the siphon, Auric! Use it now!

Fordola rem Lupis: Gah! Seven hells, my head… The pain!

Thancred: It’s working! Strike now, while she’s weak!

Fordola rem Lupis: Out of my way!

Lyse: Dammit, she won’t stay down! Use the siphon again!

Fordola rem Lupis: Graaagh! You’ll…you’ll pay for that…

Alphinaud: Keep at it! We almost have her!

12th Legion Hoplomachus: Enemy sighted, engaged with the commander! With me!

Alphinaud: Thancred! Help me hold off those soldiers!

Thancred: Understood! We leave the pilus in your capable hands!

Fordola rem Lupis: Heh heh heh… So it’s to be the two of you after all…

Lyse: Let’s finish this!

Fordola rem Lupis: If only you knew the power!

Lyse: Still got that siphon, Auric!? Then use it!

Lyse: How much more can she take!?

Fordola rem Lupis: Everything you’ve got and more, you stupid cow!

Fordola rem Lupis: Not here, not now… Not to you…

[One last blast from the siphon, and a final kick from Lyse, and Fordola falls.]

Fordola: No… Not after everything… I cannot lose… I will not!

Lyse: Oh, but you will. Without your tricks, you’re nothing!

Lyse: Conrad, Meffrid, your own comrades! I should kill you here and now for what you did!

Lyse: But there’s no place for that kind of justice here. Not in my Ala Mhigo.

Fordola: Oh, how very bloody noble of you! Pffft. You’ll pardon me my sins, will you? After you and your “freedom fighters” come and tear down everything we’ve worked so hard to build!? We were fighting for our people’s freedom!

[Fordola charges Lyse. Lyse takes her down again.]

Lyse: You’re slaves to a tyrant! There’s no freedom in that!

Alphinaud: Now, my friend!

[With Fordola under control, Alphinaud and the Warrior of Light run to one of the pods in the room and open it. Krile falls out.]

Alphinaud: Krile!

[Krile opens her eyes.]

Krile: Alphinaud…?

Krile: …I knew you’d come.

Thancred: Touching as this moment is, it will have to wait. We should rejoin the main force at once.

Thancred: Lyse!

Lyse: I’m taking her back with us. Alive. She’s going to answer for what she’s done.

Fordola: Heh heh heh…listen to you, talking like you’ve already won. Zenos is going to tear you apart. He commands a power echoing that of the eikons.

Lyse: What are you talking about?

Fordola: The hunt, you stupid cow─I’m talking about the hunt! He said you’d come. And here you are, his willing prey.

Fordola: You and your friends are dead─just like mine. And all our misery, all our sacrifice…it was all for naught!

[Lyse makes a fist, clearly contemplating finishing off Fordola.]

Lyse: …No. You’re gonna live long enough to see us win our freedom. I promise you that.

Fordola: May I live a thousand years…

Thancred: Interrogations can wait. Let us be off!

[Outside]

Alphinaud: What a relief to have finally found her! Though our greatest challenge yet lies ahead of us, on the eve of this final battle, I find myself overcome with joy…

Alphinaud: We could not have saved her without everyone’s help. Thancred, Lyse, Urianger─and of course, you.

Alphinaud: But yes, there is still much and more to be done. I should be very interested to learn the meaning of Fordola’s ominous words, for one…

Alphinaud: Lyse has gone to deliver Fordola into the custody of the Alliance, leaving M’naago and her men to hold the residential district and stand ready.

Alphinaud: Once the Alliance has breached the main gates and commenced their assault, the Resistance forces will push through the entrance here and join the fray.

Thancred: In that case, I will remain here. My search for Krile took me into the city proper, and my familiarity with their defenses may prove useful to the Resistance.

Alphinaud: Understood. I shall instruct Arenvald and his unit to render support as well.

Alphinaud: They were tasked with securing the aetheryte, as I recall. With me, Auric.

[At the aetheryte in the town center.]

Arenvald: Gods, Krile… It’s so good to see you. I feared the worst…

Krile: It wasn’t your fault. You saved me─all of you. Thank you.

Alphinaud: We will be departing shortly for Porta Praetoria to rejoin the main host.

Alphinaud: Arenvald, I would have your unit remain here with Thancred, that you might support the Resistance troops in the coming battle.

Arenvald: Understood! We won’t let you down.

Alphinaud: …I trust you will refrain from doing anything I would not. We are both far too young to die.

Arenvald: Right, right─no noble sacrifices! Got it!

Alphinaud: Auric, Krile─let us be off, then.

[Back at Porta Praetoria]

Raubahn: Ah, the heroes of the hour! Not content with securing the residential district, you gifted me an imperial commander. What are you after, a medal?

Alphinaud: The work is its own reward, General. I must say, however, that Fordola’s claims were not a little disturbing. What manner of power could Zenos have acquired that might equal an eikon?

Raubahn: Might she speak of our missing Omega?

Alphinaud: Very possibly. The Empire’s fondness for comparable Allagan technologies is exceedingly well-documented. Have we made any progress with our own investigation?

Raubahn: None. The search goes on in earnest, but Cid has thus far found nothing of note. Mayhap the Garleans beat us to it. If they were working desperately to repair the machine, that might explain their decision to remain within their walls…

Alphinaud: Ah, Lyse. I trust you surrendered Fordola into custody without incident.We were just discussing the pilus’s claims.

Lyse: About Zenos and his newfound powers? She hasn’t said a word on the subject since we rescued Krile─even when the interrogator asked nicely.

Krile: Mayhap I can offer some insight into her claims─or at least into the facility and the experiments they conducted during my time there. Though my memories of the period are somewhat muddled, there are a few things I remember with painful clarity.

Alphinaud: Thancred told us only that Fordola had undergone some…manner of treatment…

Krile: Yes… It is a place wholly dedicated to the creation of enhanced beings whom they refer to as “the Resonant.” As I understand it, the process aims to imbue a test subject with the qualities of an individual with demonstrated magical aptitude. This entails… This entails the m-mechanical extraction and transfusion of some manner of…primordial essence.

Lyse: So that’s how Fordola improved so fast. I knew there had to be something. She wasn’t half as strong or quick to predict my attacks when we first met.

Lyse: If it weren’t for Urianger’s siphon thingy, I really don’t think we’d have beaten her…

[Urianger has snuck up on the group.]

Urianger: My humble scheme asked far more in the execution than it required in the conception, I do assure thee.

Lyse: Oh, you have got to stop doing that.

Urianger: In calling upon Lady Alisaie after her defeat, I was most intrigued to learn of the apparent effortlessness with which Fordola countered her attacks. ‘Twas as if she knew the blade’s destination ere its journey began.

Urianger: A most impressive feat under any circumstances, but an almost miraculous one when considered in the context of Fordola’s unfamiliarity with my lady’s arts. How then could she so perfectly predict an unknown opponent’s every move?

Urianger: After much deliberation, I surmised that Fordola may be possessed of a preternatural ability to divine meaning from the fluctuations of an individual’s aether, and to instinctively react. To employ a metaphor, one might say that she was attuned to the whispers of my lady Alisaie’s soul.

Alphinaud: Wait! Have you not just described a manifestation of the Echo?

Urianger: I had no conclusive proof. The available anecdotal evidence suggested only that Fordola was uncommonly sensitive to aetheric fluctuations, and ’twas this which led me to develop my stratagem.

Urianger: I would fashion a device with the capacity to generate a massive disruption in the surrounding aether. If, as I suspected, Fordola’s senses were indeed questing for the most minor of oscillations, the shock of exposure to a more amplitudinous aetheric waveform would be akin to a debilitating bout of aether sickness.

Alphinaud: How…ingenious. I note that the success of your plan hinged on your device’s wielder remaining ignorant of its purpose, lest Fordola divine your intent.

Urianger: Indeed so, Master Alphinaud. All things considered, ’twas a most fortuitous outcome.

Krile: That’s putting it mildly. In any event, if Urianger is correct, that would mean these Resonant have been granted the power of the Echo via artificial means. A sobering thought to say the least─and one which makes me wonder what else Zenos has in store.

Raubahn: Whatever the viceroy’s newfound powers, I know of none better equipped to face him. And face him you must. For there is now but one path forward, and it leads straight to Ala Mhigo.

Lyse: And it’s not as if we came unprepared. We’ve got all our friends and allies fighting for the same thing. Honestly, right now, I feel like we could take on anyone and win. And I mean anyone!

[“Nevertheless, let us proceed with all due caution.”]

Lyse: Well, no one’s saying we shouldn’t be cautious! …Though maybe I was getting a bit carried away.

Lyse: Right─I’d best get back to the residential district. Thancred and the Resistance forces are waiting.

Alphinaud: It is time we joined the main host.

Alphinaud: Krile, in light of your recent ordeal…might I suggest that you remain with the rear guard for now?

Krile: Oh, if you insist…just this once.

Alphinaud: If I may, General─is there aught Auric and I can do to assist with final preparations?

Raubahn: I’m glad you asked. Pipin informed me moments ago that all forces are in position and that we are ready to commence the assault.

Raubahn: Naught remains but to notify the Alliance commanders. If you’ve no objections, I should be glad to have you do the honors, Lieutenant.

Raubahn: You were instrumental to the success of Operation Archon. You helped bring an end to the Dragonsong War. You are a hero to the people and a symbol of hope.

Raubahn: Some might judge it an empty gesture, or worse a waste of your talents, but I know it would mean much to everyone here.

Aymeric: Hah! That you should be the one to bring me word. By the Fury, it is good to see you, my friend.

Aymeric: You, who stood with us in our direst hour, will ever be an inspiration to my countrymen─and to me. Though Ishgard’s debt can never be repaid, it is my hope that our deeds this day shall go some small way to redressing the balance.

Lucia: Zenos has never cared a whit for politics. He lives for war and war alone. Kill him, or he will kill you.

Kan-E-Senna: All is ready? Very well. Though many will fall in the coming battle, how many more shall know liberty for their sacrifice.

Kan-E-Senna: There is a time for peace, and a time for war. Even the Matron understands this. We who have received of Hers and the elementals’ blessings go now to stand for Eorzea and her children.

Merlwyb: It’s time, then. Though this is not my theater of choice, we will play our part. Our cannons care not either way.

Merlwyb: That battery has sunk enough ships to fill a fleet. ‘Tis not like to be bested by a gate.

Storm Marshal Slafyrsyn: ‘Tis rare these days that I am granted leave to take the field. Mayhap I should have brought my mask…

Raubahn: It is done, then? Thank you, Lieutenant…for humoring an old bull.

Storm Officer: Maelstrom, Adder, and Ishgardian forces are in position, General!

Serpent Officer: Resistance forces in the Ala Mhigan Quarter are ready and await our signal.

Raubahn: Naught left to do but the deed itself.

Raubahn: Right, then. I must go to my men. I shall be leading the first charge through the breach.

Alphinaud: Then we shall head to the front.

Raubahn: Pipin has command of our artillery outside the gate. He’ll not be hard to find.

Raubahn: Ah, but before you go, I have a final favor to ask.

Raubahn: Give this to my son. He will understand.

[Pipin’s off to the east, by the gates of Ala Mhigo.]

Pipin: Lieutenant, Alphinaud. Hm? What is that you’ve got there?

Pipin: By the Twelve, this is…this is Tizona!

Alphinaud: The Bull of Ala Mhigo’s legendary sword, forged from two cursed blades…

Pipin: This sword is a symbol of everything my father fought to achieve. A weapon claimed on the bloodsands, and with it fortune and glory. Its flames consume the unworthy, but by fire was he reborn.

Pipin: That he should bequeath it to me now…to carry on his legacy…Well, I shall endeavor to deserve it. But I’ll be damned if this is his final battle!

Pipin: Once we begin, there will be no respite until it’s over. Are you ready, my friends?

Pipin: Very well. Brace yourselves. This should be quite a specta─

[A Flame messenger runs up.]

Flame Private: Vice Marshal! Vice Marshal! Imperial unit approaching from the north!

Pipin: Aiming to destroy our artillery, are they? How many?

Flame Private: Total numbers unconfirmed. At least one squadron. But sir─they’re wolfmen!

Pipin: Ferae Domitae. Bloody hells, that’s all we need. Call up the Bloodsworn. Tell them to make ready─

[Ed. Note: “Ferae Domitae” translates to “Wild animals that are tame.”]

Alphinaud: Marshal Tarupin, wait!

Alphinaud: These “wolfmen” of whom you speak hail from Doma. They were coerced into fighting for the Empire─spirited away to a foreign land and told that if they disobeyed, the lives of their kin would be forfeit.

Alphinaud: But their homeland has been liberated. They have no reason to continue serving their imperial masters!

Alphinaud: Ere you engage them in battle, I beseech you:  grant us a moment to go and attempt to convince them to lay down their arms!

Pipin: I am loath to gift our enemy more time to prepare…but if there is a chance that this conflict might be avoided, I suppose we must take it. Go then─but be quick.

Alphinaud: We will, Vice Marshal.

Alphinaud: With me, Auric!

[Duty: The Measure of his Reach]

Alphinaud: We will wait here for the Lupin to arrive. Steel yourself, my friend. Though I hope to resolve this without resorting to violence, it would seem wise to prepare for the worst…

[A large group of wolfmen are coming down the road at a good clip.]

Ferae Domitae Centurion: You! Clear the road!

Alphinaud: Honorable warriors of Doma! My name is Alphinaud Leveilleur, and I come before you with news of great import─

Ferae Domitae Centurion: Silence, boy! You stand upon a battlefield. Begone, or be cut down!

Alphinaud: Doma is free! Lord Hien has returned and driven Yotsuyu and the imperials from your lands! We were there─we helped him! There is no need for you to fight for Zenos!

Ferae Domitae Centurion: Lord Hien is dead, and you are a liar! What could a boy such as you do against magitek? Throw stones and spit curses!?

Ferae Domitae Centurion: Invoke my lord’s name again at your peril. We will suffer no falsehoods!

Alphinaud: I speak only the truth! Put up your weapons, I beg of you! Let us speak as friends and not shed blood in vain!

Ferae Domitae Centurion: If your claims were true, we would gladly sheathe our blades and embrace as brothers.

Ferae Domitae Centurion: But since they must surely be false, we would be traitors to accept! Our lives and those of our loved ones, forfeit!

Ferae Domitae Centurion: Words are air! You will prove the truth of your tale on the battlefield, or die in dishonor!

Ferae Domitae Spear-wolf: If you die this day, then we shall know you for liars!

Alphinaud: Truly…? Must we fight to prove that we need not fight!?

[The wolfmen fall back after about half of them are taken down.]

Ferae Domitae Centurion: You are no strangers to battle, that much is plain…

Hakuro: I am the White. I am Hakuro! And I will be your opponent! Have at you!

Hakuro Whitefang: Until I am satisfied, we shall fight on! Give me your all!

Alphinaud: On your guard! His strength far exceeds that of his brethren!

[Oddly enough, Hakuro uses pretty much the exact suite of attacks that Gilgamesh does in “Battle in the Big Keep.”]

Hakuro Whitefang: Hah! You have faced a samurai of Doma before! But I may yet surprise you…

Hakuro Whitefang: Is that all you can muster, Eorzeans!? Hold naught back!

Alphinaud: Such ferocity…! If he does not relent, we shall be forced to kill him!

Alphinaud: …So be it. Moonstone Carbuncle! Come!

Alphinaud: Stand within the carbuncle’s wards! They will grant you strength!

[Alphinaud puts away Obsidian Carbuncle and gets out a glowy white Moonstone Carbuncle instead. Where does he get all these cool rare Carbies and why can’t I have one?]

Hakuro Whitefang: Enough. You are every bit the warriors you claim to be.

Hakuro: You fought with honor and restraint. You could have killed my men, and perhaps even me…but you did not. For this, I thank you.

Hakuro: Warriors brave and true. I pray you tell us of the battle for Doma’s liberation.

Alphinaud: We should be glad to do so…

Hakuro: …Lord Hien, returned! Such joy this news brings us.

Hakuro: But for Lord Gosetsu to perish in the keep’s collapse…to be taken from us by such treachery… There is no justice…

[Hey, we didn’t actually find a body, you know. I’m sure he’ll be back.] [Unfortunately this is not one of the dialog options.]

[“Eyes forward, Hakuro. He wished for no better death.”]

Hakuro: You knew him well. Aye, he would not suffer us to mourn with so much undone. And so we will not. Duty comes before all.

Hakuro: All Lupin shall know of Doma’s liberation, and of your part in it.

Hakuro: When you breach the gates, we shall turn on the imperials as one. With fang and claw shall we rip open the throats of our masters. This the White swears.

Alphinaud: Thank you. When our war is ended, I am certain that your lord will help us to return you all to Doma.

Hakuro: Such a curious thing, destiny, to see us meet with friends of Lord Hien in this distant corner of the world. But we shall not keep you─your day is not yet done.

Alphinaud: Come, let us not keep our comrades waiting. We have a nation to liberate!

[Back to Pipin]

Pipin: Ah, you are returned. Were your negotiations with the wolfmen successful?

Alphinaud: The one they call the White was receptive to our words once we told him of Doma’s liberation.

Alphinaud: They withdrew behind the walls to inform their brethren. If the gods are good, no blood shall be shed between our peoples this day.

Pipin: Hear, hear. Now…I think it’s time we did something about those gates.

Pipin: Thaumaturges, forward!

[Hey it’s the five Cocobros.]

Pipin: Give me hellfire! Give me Ifrit’s bloody inferno!

[The Cocobros rain fire down on the gates of Ala Mhigo.]

Pipin: Now give me a Coerthan winter! Enough ice and snow to bury a behemoth!

[Glacier shards pelt down from the sky.]

Pipin: All cannons, fire at will! Let no man say we neglected to knock!

[The barrage of cannonballs appears to be on the verge of taking down the gate, but then a pair of flying drones appear and fire on the Cocobros, disrupting their spells.]

Pipin: Damn that armor! We nearly had it!

[There is the cry of a wild bird, and a yol dives on one of the flying drones. From its back, Hien slashes with his katana, knocking the drone out of the sky.]

Alphinaud: Is that─?

Hien: Bear witness, my Eorzean brothers and sisters! Doma is come to pay her debts!

Alphinaud: Lord Hien!

Hien: We will deal with the flying machines! Forward, my friends! For freedom and justice!

Pipin: You heard the man! All cannons, resume firing!

[They do. And the gates fall.]

Alphinaud: We’re through! The way is clear!

Pipin: Impeccable timing, those Domans! Come, comrades! The enemy’s gate is down! Forward!

Pipin: The battle for Ala Mhigo is at hand! All forces have been ordered to advance into the city proper!

Pipin: I trust your unit of elite adventurers is ready, Lieutenant? Excellent! Your objective is to make haste for the castle and kill Zenos yae Galvus! Any questions? Of course not! Now, go and get the bastard!

[Dungeon level 70: Ala Mhigo]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Heh heh heh heh…

Zenos Yae Galvus: Ahahahahahaha! Yes, yes! Such ferocity, such tenacity!

 Zenos Yae Galvus: I am loath to recall how disappointed I was when first we fought…but finally, finally, after bathing in the blood and offal of your enemies, finally you prove yourself worthy prey for the hunt!

Zenos Yae Galvus: It fills you even now, doesn’t it? The hunger. To bite down on my jugular, to feel the warmth fill your mouth and run over even as you drink deep. Good, good! This is the beast I have longed to face!

Zenos Yae Galvus: As you sharpened your claws, I too sought newfound strength! But this is no place for a final contest. Come! The heavens shall bear witness to our dance!

[Zenos walks out of the throne room. The Warrior of Light follows.]

[In the back of the castle there’s a huge winged creature – Shinryu – floating off the ground, imprisoned in a lightning field.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Welcome to the Royal Menagerie.

Zenos Yae Galvus: The King of Ruin built this place for his foreign queen. He kept it filled with familiar creatures from her homeland. They bored me all.

Zenos Yae Galvus: This fine specimen, on the other hand, is simply…divine.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Your fates are entwined, are they not, eikon-slayer? This dragon, this…embodiment of unbridled despair, born of a desperate man’s burning hatred for the Empire…

Zenos Yae Galvus: How raw the raging tempest that churns within its breast. No myth made manifest this, but…a being of pure violence.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Hah hah, mayhap you are the true architect of our design. You who fought the very soul of vengeance to the edge and watched him fall; you who let slip the Allagan hound to drive this eikon into my arms!

Zenos Yae Galvus: Oh… My. Have I said too much? Forgive me, this…sensation is wholly unfamiliar to me.

Zenos Yae Galvus: A question, then─and I should like very much for you to speak from the heart. If I were to stand aside, what would you do to this eikon?

[You’re gonna monologue at me no matter what I say, so why bother.]

[“…”]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Hm. You will not indulge me even with a simple reply, then? No. You think only of the fight to come. How alike we are.

Zenos Yae Galvus: A pity. There is another alternative. Or there would be…had you only mastered your abilities.

Zenos Yae Galvus: I speak of the Echo, of course. Does it merely render you immune to eikonic influence? Or is it rather that your influence is far greater than theirs? Granted, these implications are of no moment to a savage, who thinks only of killing the beast before him…

Zenos Yae Galvus: But when I read van Baelsar’s reports, I immediately saw the boundless potential of the Echo. I saw how it could be instrumental in binding an eikon to one’s will. Hence my research and the Resonant─and oh so much more!

Zenos Yae Galvus: All eikons must be exterminated, without exception. Such was the imperial mandate issued by my great-grandfather after he saw firsthand the destruction wrought by one such being. They are a blight upon this star, he felt, and so he began his great and just crusade.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Pah! ‘Twas not justice which spurred his campaign, but fear! Fear of the eikons, fear of their power. Cowardice made them march forth to battle. Pathetic!

Zenos Yae Galvus: Man should fight for the joy of it. To live, to eat, to breed─lesser beasts snap and howl at one another for this. Only man has the wisdom and the clarity to embrace violence for its own sake.

Zenos Yae Galvus: For we who are born into this merciless, meaningless world, have but one candle of life to burn.

Zenos Yae Galvus: I know you understand this. You and I are one and the same. Together, we could while away the quiet hours, as friend and confidant…if you will accept me.

[Ewwwww.]

[“I deny you.”]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Heh heh…and yet, in doing so, you prove me right. We are warriors. ‘Twas plain from the first how this would end.

Zenos Yae Galvus: You live for these moments─when all hangs in the balance…when the difference between life and death is but a single stroke.

Zenos Yae Galvus: I live for them too! This is who we are, my friend! This is all we are! Ala Mhigo and Doma and Garlemald be damned!

[Zenos slices the seal on Shinryu’s prison, freeing the dragon.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: We tower above the gods! You by your gift, I by my might!

[Zenos’ eyes glow red with the same geometric pattern seen in one of Fordola’s.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: And before the Resonant the gods shall be made to kneel!

[Zenos glows bright red, and levitates upward into Shinryu, somehow merging with the new Primal.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: An ending to mark a new beginning!

[Trial level 70: The Royal Menagerie]

[FIGHT!  FIGHT! FIGHT!]

[With Shinryu defeated, Zenos plummets from the sky like a falling star. The Warrior of Light appears safely back in the Royal Menagerie.]

[Lyse and Alphinaud run in.]

Lyse: Are you all right!?

Lyse: Zenos!

[Somehow, Zenos is not dead. He drags himself to his feet, spitting blood, and reaches for his sword.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Hah…hah…hah… The hunter has indeed become the hunted.

Zenos Yae Galvus: And yet…there is only joy. Transcendent joy that I have never known. How invigorating, how…pure, this feeling.

Lyse: Is that what this was all about? All the meaningless death and destruction? So you could feel something!?

Zenos Yae Galvus: Meaningless? Men die that others may live. Those who survive are stronger for it.

Zenos Yae Galvus: Not that you could ever understand. To have stood upon this great stage of fools…to have played my part to perfection…

Zenos Yae Galvus: Oh, this…this moment…let it be enshrined in eternity. My heart…beating out of time… So clear, so vivid, so real… So real.

[Zenos raises his blade and lays the edge of it against his own neck.]

Alphinaud: Coward!

Lyse: Stop!

[Lyse lunges forward to stop Zenos, but she is not fast enough.]

[Zenos looks at the Warrior of Light.]

Zenos Yae Galvus: Farewell, my first friend. My enemy.

[Zenos slits his own throat.]

[Raubahn, Hien, and Pipen run in.]

Raubahn: Where is he?

Alphinaud: He’s dead. By his own hand.

Raubahn: Then justice has been done.

Lyse: No…there’s no justice in that…in that rabid animal’s end.

Alphinaud: Liberty or death. That so many should be forced to take up this creed to defeat such madness…

Raubahn: We won. Forget him. The living have need of us now.

Hien: Stand tall, Lyse! Now is the time to raise a cheer for all who fought for freedom! A cheer loud enough to carry to the highest heavens!

Lyse: …You’re right.

Lyse: Thank you. Without you… Well…you know.

Lyse: So let’s do it together. For Ala Mhigo!

[More of the Alliance come running in. Arenveld sees Zenos’ dead body and blows a battle horn. People cheer.]

[The victory progression begins, as the assembled people sing the Ala Mhigan anthem.]

“O come ye wayward brothers,

Bereft of hearth and home,

Beneath yon burning star there lies

A haven for the bold.

Raise up your hands and voices,

Let fill your hearts with pride,

Above the churning waters

We stand strong and unified.”


[Lyse narrates: “In crimson it began, and in crimson it ended. And then…and then we were free.”]

.[Lyse narrates: “But what is freedom, really? We may be free to live, to love, to grow old. To have dreams and desires, and to strive for them. But in the end, we’re defined by the legacy our forefathers bequeath to us. Even Zenos was once a baby in the cradle, innocent and pure. He was made into a creature that lived only for death, not born one. Twenty years of Imperial rule have left Ala Mhigo torn and bleeding. It won’t be easy to heal a generation’s worth of wounds, to bridge the gap. But I won’t give up, Papalymo. I won’t. Because I remember the price of freedom. I remember the smoke and the blood. I remember the screams…and the silence. And I’ll do whatever it takes to honor their sacrifice. To build a home for us all. I promise you. This is the end. The end of the imperial province of Ala Mhigo, and the rebirth of Ala Mhigo the free nation. Long may she endure.”]


[Roll credits!]

[We then see Estinien walking in the flowers in the Royal Menagerie.]

Estinien: Well, well, well, what a fine mess we’ve made.

[He looks down in the flowers and sees Nidhogg’s eyes lying there.]

Estinien: All but spent feeding that primal, eh? Well, you won’t be making any mischief with that amount of aether.

[He pulls out his spear and holds it over one of the eyes, blade almost touching.]

Estinien: Still…better safe than sorry.

[He spears each eye in turn. They dissolve into reddish mist and vanish.]

Estinien: There. There ends your hateful legacy.

[Estinien walks away.]

[Elsewhere, in the Garlean Empire, Varis zos Galvus stands before a bank of control panels.]

Varis zos Galvus: …It’s over.

???: My condolences for your loss. A father should not outlive his son.

Varis zos Galvus: …What nonsense.

[The mystery speaker is revealed as Elidibus, the white-robed Ascian.]

Elidibus: You do not mourn his loss? …You surprise me, Your Radiance. He was your son and heir…and an irreplaceable test subject.

Varis zos Galvus: I know what he was. Monsters are not made for thrones.

Varis zos Galvus: Nor are stars made to sustain false gods who sup on their very essence. Eikons summoned by desperate savages who hearken to the whispers of shadowless charlatans.

Elidibus: Should you raise a hand against my black-robed brethren, I will not stop you. Our desires are one and the same. Preservation. Restoration.

Varis zos Galvus: Compression. Resurrection. All is in service to your “one true god.” And when the sundered shards are made whole, will there be a place for us mere mortals?

Elidibus: Doubt my claims and question my motives if you will, Your Radiance. You will come to trust me in time. Until then, mayhap you will find this…reassuring.

[Elidibus turns his back to the camera, then takes off his red half-mask so Varis can see his face. Varis looks astonished.]

Varis zos Galvus: How…how dare you…

[Back in Ala Mhigo]

Lyse: We did it. We liberated Ala Mhigo. I don’t know what to say… I don’t even know how to feel about it all…

Lyse: Relief, I suppose. Pride…and hope, too. We did it, Father. Yda. Papalymo. Conrad, Meffrid… Minfilia… We really did it…

Lyse: Hey, don’t feel like you have to stand here listening to me mumble. Everyone else will want to talk to you.

Lyse: You beat him, after all. You’re the real hero of this story. So run along and take your plaudits!

M’naago: Can you believe it? We won! We beat the bastards! Ala Mhigo! Ala Mhigo!

M’naago: Heh heh… Sorry, got a bit carried away there, didn’t I? It’s hard not to, you know?

M’naago: We owe it to the friends we buried to shout and scream and cheer with all our hearts. I want them to know it wasn’t for nothing─that it’s finally over, and they can rest in peace.

M’naago: You…you hear that lads? <sniffle> We’ll be all right! We’ll…we’ll be… <sniffle> Oh bugger, not again…

M’naago: I’m so…I’m so bleedin’ happy, I could cry! <sniffle>

Alphinaud: After all we have been through, I really should know better than to worry, but─as ever─the relief I felt upon finding you hale and whole in the Royal Menagerie well-nigh reduced me to tears…

Alphinaud: “The Warrior of Light,“ victorious again… Hm. I should be surprised if some small part of you had not come to resent the title and the responsibilities which accompany it. You must forgive us if we call you ”hero“ when you accomplish heroic feats…

Alphinaud: But as the Warrior of Light goes, so goes the world. You should take pride in the good you have done, and in the good you have inspired others to do.

Thancred: You are a natural born leader of men, Auric. All these people weren’t just following their commanders─they were following you.

Alphinaud: And you led them to victory. To freedom! …Alas, not everyone could see the journey through to its end. But history shall remember them, and the glorious future they made possible.

Raubahn: The hero of the hour! I suppose we’ll have to add “liberator” to your titles.

Raubahn: With their commander fallen, the remainder of the XIIth chose to surrender to our forces. After twenty long years, it’s official:  the occupation is ended.

Raubahn: But now the hard work starts. Though the people have had their fill of kings, there is no clear consensus on what sort of government they would prefer instead.

Pipin: Indeed, Father. Momentous as this achievement may be, the road which lies before us is no less uncertain than the one we have walked.

Raubahn: Aye, aye. Yet if we can overcome two decades of oppression, I’ve no doubt we can find a way forward. Thank you, Lieutenant, for helping to make this dream a reality.

Yugiri: For you to best Zenos, even after he had harnessed the power of a primal, is a testament to your ever-growing strength.

Hien: Not bitter to have had your vengeance stolen from you by another?

Yugiri: There is some small regret, perhaps, but that is outweighed by the satisfaction I find in his death. I commend you, Auric.

Hien: As should we all. Zenos was a monster and a tyrant─the man who killed my father and countless other of my countrymen. The world is a better place without him in it.

Hien: I should also praise Master Alphinaud for his foresight and restraint. Had he not intervened, I might never have had the pleasure of being reunited with Hakuro and his Lupin brothers!

Hakuro: ‘Twas a timely intervention, aye. Full glad am I not to have been burdened with the guilt of killing my lord Hien’s most trusted allies.

Yugiri: Hah! Indeed, my friend. Indeed.

Lyse: Finished your rounds? Great. In that case, I’d like you to come with me. Back to Rhalgr’s Reach.

Lyse: Not for a rematch or anything, sadly. I want to call all the Scions together. I’ll explain later.

[At Rhalgr’s Reach]

[Scions gathered]

Lyse: I…I don’t even know where to begin…

Lyse: We’ve been through a lot together, haven’t we? I can’t thank you enough.

Lyse: There’s something I need to say to you all. That is, if you have a moment…?

 Lyse: Good, you’re all here. Good, good…

Lyse: “Thank you“ doesn’t really suffice, does it? I’m grateful…truly grateful, from the bottom of my heart.

Lyse: But I know you didn’t fight so hard just to hear me or anyone else say that. You fought because you wanted to help─because you believed it was right. Because you’re Scions.

Lyse: Now, I’m obviously a Scion, but as Conrad left me in charge of things here, I also have responsibilities to Ala Mhigo…

Lyse: When I put it like that, though…I realized I couldn’t even pretend to be impartial anymore. So it seemed best to make it official.

Lyse: As long as I serve Ala Mhigo, I can’t be a Scion. It might be selfish and shortsighted…but that’s my decision.

Y’shtola: Am I to understand that you summoned us all─some of us still nursing wounds─to hear this?

Lyse: Oh! I-I…I didn─ Um…

Y’shtola: Hahaha! Forgive me, Lyse! ‘Twas but a jest.

Y’shtola: But this I say with the utmost sincerity:   Scion or no, we are comrades. Now and ever after.

Y’shtola: Is that not so?

[Nods all around]

Y’shtola: There you have it. Come what may, you may count on us in your hour of need. We shall never refuse you.

Lyse: Y’shtola… Oh gods, I swore I wouldn’t cry…

[On a sunny beach somewhere…]

???: Come back here, you slippery little devil! <grumble> To think fishing could be so difficult!

???: What greater proof of a man’s lingering mortality than an empty belly. A fate worse than death.

???: Fie on it. To have arrived at the appointed place and time, only to survive by mere force of habit. Truly, the kami are not finished with us yet.

[Like I tried to tell people, we never saw a body.]

Gosetsu: O capricious fortune! How you test me with this wretched soul…

[What’s surprising is Yotsuyu is there too –  seemingly unconscious, but alive!]

[Somewhere else, I think in the Lochs, Cid and the Ironworks crew are studying a crater.]

Cid: …Hm. This is indeed the work of either Shinryu or Omega.

Cid: …And since there is undeniably something down there radiating a massive amount of energy…which cannot very well be the late viceroy’s lapdragon… Yes, I think we have our suspect.

Cid: Well. This is a mess of our own making, so it falls to us to clean it up. It won’t be easy…but is it ever?

Jessie: And now comes the part where you say you’ve got no choice but to divert company resources and employees to this pet project of yours. Lost profits and belligerent clients be damned.

Cid: I…er… Financial considerations notwithstanding, you have to admit there is an unquantifiable benefit in giving our people the opportunity to study such advanced technology─

Jessie: Oh? Is that before or after you blow it up or seal it away? Fine, fine─but the moment I judge this little venture an unsustainable risk to the Ironworks, I’m ending it, savvy?

Jessie: And to keep you honest, using my authority as deputy president, I’ve gone ahead and brought in a consultant─a master engineer and mechanical genius!

Cid: …You didn’t.

???: Come now, you mustn’t build their expectations too high! It will be less dramatic when I surpass them.

Cid: Oh. Oh no. Absolutely not. This is not happening.

[Nero has a new outfit but he STILL can’t be bothered to shave properly. Either clean it up or grow it out, man!]

Nero tol Scaeva: Nero tol Scaeva, eager to begin his first day as a loyal member of the Ironworks team! Looking forward to working with you, Garlond!


(Speaking to Lyse and M’naago in Rhalg’r’s Reach)

Lyse: Come to see how we’re getting on? We’ve made good progress since we took back Ala Mhigo, but there’s one big issue we still have to address…Leadership. The Domans had Lord Hien ready and willing to take the throne, but we’ve got no one like that here.  Theodoric was our last ruler─and he wasn’t called the mad king for nothing.

M’naago: Suffice it to say, our people have had their fill of kings─which means we need to find a new way forward.

Lyse: If only it were that easy. Everyone and his uncle has an opinion.   For the time being, we’re just going to have to keep leaning on General Aldynn and the Alliance for support, and see if we can’t find a solution together. Something tells me we’re going to be hosting a lot of meetings in the near future…But if that’s what it takes, I’m ready to talk till my jaw aches! The Reach is yours, Naago. Don’t do anything I wouldn’t.

M’naago: Aye, aye, Commander!

(Lyse walks off and Arenvald walks up.)

Arenvald: Ah, there you are! I’ve been searching all over for you. Don’t worry, it’s nothing bad. That said, this might not be the best place to talk. Will you join me?

(We move to a quieter part of Rhalgr’s Reach.)

Arenvald: I’ll get to the point: might you be interested in a spot of adventure? After all, we were “adventurers” before we were Scions, were we not? After routing the imperials and liberating Ala Mhigo, I reckon we’ve earned a bit of respite, don’t you? And what better way to spend it than by returning to our roots? So what say you: shall we call on Alphinaud and go adventuring?


(“Twist my arm, why don’t you!”)

Arenvald: Right then, let’s go and find Master Leveilleur. Actually, leave that to me. I want you fresh for our little adventure. Wait for us by the aetheryte, and we’ll be along shortly. See you there!

(By the Reach Aetheryte)

Arenvald: Allow me to explain. It’ll be something of a history lesson, but I’ll try to be brief. No snoring, if you please. Now, the events I would speak of occurred before the occupation─back when Ala Mhigo was still a monarchy, and Theodoric sat the throne.

Alphinaud: A uniquely brutal despot, by all accounts.

Arenvald: That he was. The King of Ruin suffered no rivals, real or imagined, and his dispute with the monks of the Fist ended with Rhalgr’s Reach being burned to the ground. In the latter years of his rule, he was seized by the unshakable belief that unseen forces were conspiring to steal his crown. And so he ordered that every soul with a claim to the throne be executed─including his own family. The wealth of the poor sods he put to death became the property of the king, and it’s said that these royal treasures were hoarded somewhere in the palace. Thus was born the legend of the “mad king’s trove.”

Alphinaud: Ah. I believe I see the direction our adventure is to take. I assume you have a mind to unearth this hidden bounty?

Arenvald: You assume correctly!

Alphinaud: And would I also be correct in assuming that this legend is widely known? Others must surely have gone in search of your prize, tempting as it seems.

Arenvald: Well, of course we won’t be the first to make the attempt. Following Ala Mhigo’s liberation, more than a few eager soldiers turned the palace upside down in hopes of claiming an easy fortune.  But even after scouring every room from dawn till dusk, they uncovered not a single coin. Their gold-lust drained away as quickly as it had come, and the legend of the mad king’s trove remains simply that─a legend.

Alphinaud: But I see you have no intention of letting the story end there.

Arenvald: What self-respecting adventurer would!? Imagine: the three of us, delving into a decades-old mystery! Tell me the thought doesn’t set your heart to racing!

Alphinaud: The news of Doma and Ala Mhigo’s liberation has kindled the flames of revolution in every corner of the Empire. I hear the imperial province of Dalmasca has already risen up in rebellion……Which means the Garleans must surely have their hands full. What better time than now to indulge in such a diversion? Tell us, Arenvald─have we any clues as to where we might begin our search?

Arenvald: Well, judging by how the other treasure hunters fared, nosing about the palace isn’t like to get us anywhere, so…we’ll probably need to, uh…ask around.

Alphinaud: Would that be another way of saying “no”?

Arenvald: Well… Heh heh heh! Yes.

Alphinaud: I see. In that case, I shall pay a visit to the Allied archivists and request access to the records seized from the imperials. The Garleans are meticulous about such things. If they uncovered the trove during their occupation, the event is certain to have been recorded. In the meantime, the two of you can track down those who worked as palace servants and officials in Theodoric’s day. Given that they would have been at least twenty at the time, you will be looking for people who have seen forty summers or more. Anything they can tell you about the king and his bloody deeds may prove useful, so be sure to listen well. Arenvald, pray try your luck in the Fringes and the Peaks whilst Diana makes the rounds in the Ala Mhigan Quarter.

Arenvald: Hah! And there I was thinking I was the party leader. Not that I mind, of course! Let’s be about it, eh? We can meet afterwards at Gylbarde’s Gate!

(Off to the Ala Mhigan Quarter to question the locals!)

Middle-aged Highlander: …In the palace? No, not me, lass. Surely you’ve heard stories of the mad king? He used to hold public executions up on the Divine Audience. Anyone─and I mean anyone─suspected of conspiring against the crown was flung from the top of those steps. Suffice it to say that I stayed as far away from the palace as possible.

Mature Maid: You want to hear an old maid’s stories, do you? Aye, well most of what I know of the mad king is common knowledge. We’d only see His Royal Majesty when he deigned to attend the executions he’d ordered. And after a while, even watching his “enemies” die wasn’t enough to coax him out of hiding. They say he started seeing assassins in every shadow, and wouldn’t set foot outside the palace walls. I was offered work there as a royal servant once, but the mere thought of it left me in a cold sweat…

Retired Roegadyn: …Aye, I served at the pleasure of King Theodoric, and lived to tell the tale. One of the palace guards, I was. Truth be told, it was a dark chapter in my life, and one I’d sooner forget. Hardly a night went by when we didn’t hear bloodcurdling screams echoing from the inner chambers─which, of course, we were under orders to ignore. So we’d stand still as statues, trying not to imagine what horrors were unfolding within… If you’re hells-bent on finding out what happened in the palace, head down the street here and ask old Ernold─he was the king’s head scribe.

Ernold: Yes, I am Ernold. …What do you want with me? Hmmm, you would have me dredge up some decidedly unsavory memories. Yet if Ala Mhigo is to move forward, we must needs acknowledge the misdeeds of the past. Very well, I shall tell you what I remember. I take it you know of Theodoric’s paranoia and the public executions of his kinsmen? Those were terrible enough. But in his last days, the king’s fevered mind settled upon an even grislier method of “disposal” which only a chosen few were unfortunate enough to witness. His Majesty ordered the court thaumaturge to unleash a vile curse upon the remaining members of the royal family─a magic which transformed them into fiends of hideous aspect. The resulting…monstrosities were then cast into the darkness below the palace. Even now, my sleep is troubled by nightmares. If others of Theodoric’s blood were prone to share his madness, then mayhap it is a kindness that the monarchy ended with him.

(Rendezvous with Alphinaud and Arenvald)

Arenvald: Since we’re all here, why don’t we share what we’ve learned?

Alphinaud: Allow me to begin, then. As promised, I scoured the imperial records for any mention of fantastic treasures…and found precisely none. It is just possible, I suppose, that a corrupt official deliberately hid the fact of the trove’s discovery, hoping to enrich himself─but I find it rather unlikely that so valuable a find would stay secret for long. I conclude that our prize either does not exist, or that the imperials somehow overlooked it. But what of you, Diana? Were your investigations any more fruitful? …Turned into monsters? And what could he mean by this “darkness beneath the palace,” I wonder…

Arenvald: I met an old man in Ala Ghiri who spoke of the palace’s subterranean prison, but he said naught of cursed abominations!

Alphinaud: The imperial archives were also silent on the subject of fiends inside the palace grounds.

Arenvald: Could this scribe fellow have been spinning her a yarn, do you think? Did you believe him, Diana?

(“His fear seemed genuine.”)

Arenvald: If he was afraid, that does lend credence to the tale─though I’m not sure how that helps us in our search.

Alphinaud: Do not be so hasty─Ernold’s anecdote may very well have told us where the trove is hidden. But ere I share my theory, there is a matter I would clarify. Arenvald, you spoke of lighthearted adventure, but I sense a deeper motive for this expedition. Why are you so intent on finding this treasure?

Arenvald: …It wasn’t all pretense, I swear it. But…you’re right. My father was in the imperial army, a man of Garlean blood. I trust you know what I mean when I say that my Ala Mhigan mother did not welcome my arrival? As I grew, she would check my brow over and over, convinced that a spot on my skin was an emerging third eye─like the kind you see in pureblood Garleans. My mother did not care for this taunting reminder of my heritage, and took up a knife…War paint serves to cover the scar. In the end, she turned me out into the street, and I was left to haunt the alleyways of Ala Mhigo, a feral child who got what he needed through begging, cunning, or worse. The best I can say about the years that followed is that I survived. But I hated the animal I’d become. Eventually, I left the city behind me, and joined a group of refugees bound for the other side of the Wall. It was then that I turned to adventuring, and that road led me into the company of the Scions. I tell you this so that you understand I know all too well what poverty and hunger can do to a person. I drew steel on ordinary folk for a measly crust of bread. With Theodoric’s gold, I could spare my countrymen the shame of living like that.

Alphinaud: Thank you, Arenvald, and I apologize─that cannot have been pleasant to recall. But I felt it best to be clear in our intentions. Well, Diana? Are you content to surrender the treasure to Arenvald’s noble cause, and claim the thrill of adventure as your reward? Then I should be glad to tell you my theory on the resting place of the mad king’s trove…if you are minded to hear it?

Alphinaud: …Actually, mayhap it would be better if we first adjourned to a more suitable location.

Arenvald: …In case a rival treasure hunter overhears our plans, you mean? Good thinking!

Alphinaud: That…was not exactly the reason, but ’tis certainly a valid concern. Let us reconvene on the southern edge of Loch Seld.

(By the shore of the salt lake)

Alphinaud: Forgive me. ‘Twas not my intention to draw out proceedings. I simply wished to have the loch in sight while I explained things. Prior to the great flood of the Sixth Umbral Calamity, the salt lakes you see before you were yet dry ravines. And this, believe it or not, was the site of the ancient city of Skalla, which rose and fell during the Fifth Astral Era. From what we know of the period, the city was already deserted by the time the waters began to rise, having been all but destroyed by war. Yet its ruins remain to this day at the bottom of Loch Seld. It is my belief that the “darkness beneath the palace” mentioned by Theodoric’s former scribe was not a reference to the prison, but to a place still further below:  the ruins of Skalla. I further surmise that the mad king’s unfortunate kinsmen were cast down there not simply out of a desire to punish them, but to discourage exploration. Theodoric wanted to keep the ruins secure…

Alphinaud: Prior to the great flood of the Sixth Umbral Calamity, the salt lakes you see before you were yet dry ravines. And this, believe it or not, was the site of the ancient city of Skalla, which rose and fell during the Fifth Astral Era.

Arenvald: Wait…you’re saying…they were meant to guard the mad king’s trove!

Alphinaud: Precisely. And since we know the court thaumaturge was involved, we can safely assume that any entrance into the old city will have been magically concealed.

Arenvald: …Which would explain how a legion of imperial soldiers and the gods know how many Ala Mhigans never found a trace of the trove.

Alphinaud: We, however, have certain advantages which they did not enjoy. Diana─would you be so good as to swim down to the bottom of the loch and search for an underwater route into the ruins? While you do that, Arenvald and I will seek out an ensorcelled portal within the palace.

(Splash!)

(Deep under the lake’s surface is an ancient stone door)

(The linkpearl chimes)

Alphinaud’s Voice: Diana─it’s Alphinaud. We have searched the prison beneath the palace, and found a door concealed by enchantments. Have you aught to report? …And you believe it leads into the ruins? Excellent. Then I propose we proceed from our respective entry points and look to meet somewhere in the middle.

Arenvald’s Voice: Oh, come on, you two─we might as well make it a race! Victory goes to the first adventurer to find the treasure! Godsspeed!

(Upon defeating monsters in here, most of them transform back to Hyur)

(After defeating Hrodric Poisontongue, a hole cracks open in the ceiling and Alphinaud and Arenvald tumble through.)

Arenveld: Bugger it.  (Note: It’s not in the chat text, but he definitely says it!)

Alphinaud: Are you all right?

Arenvald: Aye…aye… Everything’s still attached.

(Alphinaud looks up and sees the Warrior of Light)

Alphinaud: Ah… It seems both our paths led here. Very good. We spent altogether too much time fleeing fiends horrid and numerous. How fared you? Much the same, then. ‘Twould appear this place is yet inhabited by King Theodoric’s kin─or what is left of them. The work of terrible magicks, I fear…

Arenvald: Terrible, aye, but their misfortune is our…fortune?

Alphinaud: Quite… By the Twelve, there is even more than I imagined…

Arenvald: Oh, I can’t wait to see the look on Lyse’s face! Thanks for believing in me, you two!

(We exit the Drowned City and emerge back on the streets of the Ala Mhigan Quarter)

Alphinaud: Arenvald and I forged ahead at the fastest pace we could manage, but I was not surprised to find you waiting for us. I suppose it serves us right for challenging the Warrior of Light. Next time, we should agree on some manner of handicap…

Arenvald: Ah, we may have lost, Alphinaud─but think of what we found!

Alphinaud: Quite. I am still reeling at the sight of that mountain of riches…

Arenvald: What, like how you reeled at the sight of that floating specter, you mean? You should have heard him scream, Diana!

Alphinaud: M-Must we dwell on such momentary lapses!? We found the mad king’s trove, and that is all that matters!

Quest: The Butcher’s Blood

Arenvald: All jesting aside, we must tell people the good news. And I think Lyse should be the first.

Alphinaud: Seconded. There is to be a meeting of representatives from across Ala Mhigo, so she is sure to be in the city. Shall we seek her out?

(We meet with Lyse elsewhere in the Quarter)

Lyse: Oh? You three look pleased with yourselves. What’ve you been up to?

Arenvald: I’m glad you asked, Lyse. And I’m pretty sure you’re going to like the answer…

Lyse: You’re joking… The mad king’s trove!? I thought it was a myth!

Arenvald: So did plenty of people. But they didn’t have Diana and Alphinaud in their party. The credit for finding it should really go to them. As for what to do with it all…I vote that it go towards alleviating the suffering of Ala Mhigo’s poor.

Lyse: Gods… If there’s as much as you say…

Alphinaud: Arenvald did not exaggerate, I assure you. We could not hope to carry even a fraction of it out on our own. I have taken the liberty of sketching out a rough map of the ruins─if you will assemble a squad of your most trusted freedom fighters, they should be able to follow the route to where the treasure lies.

Lyse: Understood. I’ll make sure every coin is accounted for, and that goes for the spending of it as well!

Arenvald: Thank you.

Arenvald: Oh, there is one other thing: when the times comes to draw up a plan for distributing the spoils, I would ask that you consult Alphinaud. I don’t have a head for details. I’m not…educated. I see that simply handing out sacks of gil won’t solve everything, but I couldn’t rightly tell you what to do instead.

Lyse: Oh, I know the feeling! I’d welcome any advice you could give us, Alphinaud.

Alphinaud: Of course. I shall be at your disposal.

(A member of the Resistance comes running up)

Resistance Fighter: Commander! We’ve got a problem!

Lyse: Deep breaths. Tell me what’s happened.

Resistance Fighter: A mob’s gathered outside headquarters, and they’ve started making demands. You’d best come and see for yourself!

(We run off to see what the problem is.)

(At HQ, M’naago is holding off a group of several dozen angry Ala Mhigans.)

M’naago: Step back, all of you!

Tattooed Troublemaker: Like hells we will! We know who you’ve got in there!

Wrathful Resident: We’re not leaving till you hand her over!

Raging Resident: Bring her out! Bring her out!

Lyse: What’s going on!?

M’naago: Someone let slip about Fordola…

Tattooed Troublemaker: It’s true then! The bitch really is in there! I knew it! I bloody knew it! We demand vengeance! Bring her out! Today we butcher the Butcher!

Lyse: Butcher the…? Come on, you don’t mean that. We’d be no better than the imperials! If you’d all just calm down─

Wrathful Resident: Calm down!? That monster and her thrice-damned Skulls dragged my man from our home and beat him to death in the street!

Raging Resident: Aye! And my dad! That bitch has spilt enough blood to fill a loch!

Tattooed Troublemaker: We all know her crimes! She’s a traitor and a murderer! How many of your Resistance friends have died at her hands, eh? And here you are protecting her!

(Raubahn walks up)

Raubahn: So that’s what all the fuss is about… Hearken to me, brothers and sisters of Ala Mhigo! My friends─you are not alone in your anger, your grief, your despair, for it is mine as well! That gnawing pain in your breast…it is enough to bring an old bull to his knees. But I ask you, brothers and sisters, to think not only of the family and friends who were cut down before your very eyes, but to think also of the ones who were abducted─the ones who may yet live! Where were they taken? What became of them? These questions demand answers! I share your thirst for justice. For vengeance. But we will gain only fleeting satisfaction if we give in to our base appetites─we will never know the truth! Now is the time that we, the people of Ala Mhigo, must decide what manner of nation we will build for ourselves, and for generations yet unborn. When they look to our example, will they see a people who held fast to their principles, or one who cast them aside when tried? I say to you, it is our responsibility to give these prisoners a fair trial, that they might answer to all of Ala Mhigo! The Garleans called us savages, and I’ll be damned if we prove them right!

(The crowd applauds Raubahn’s impassioned speech.)

Tattooed Troublemaker: I know you’re right, I do, but…I can’t…

(Raubahn looks at the man. The man looks down. The crowd disperses.)

Lyse: My thanks, Raubahn. Listening to their anger, I could feel myself being swept away…

Raubahn: ‘Tis a difficult tide to stem. ‘Twas that same rage which brought us to our feet, and carried us to victory. But now the war is over, all the unspent fury is being channeled into vengeance.

M’naago: Aye, and it’s not just here─we’ve reports of mobs forming all over. They’ve been targeting folk known to have cooperated with the Garleans. It starts with insults most often, then someone picks up a stone… Some industrious souls even thought to seek out the graves of Zenos and his officers. It was…grim.

Lyse: I want to build a country where everyone, regardless of race or origin, can live side by side in peace. But maybe the time isn’t right. Maybe people just aren’t ready… But that doesn’t mean I’m not going to try. The representatives will be here soon, and I’ll be damned if I’m going to give up before I’ve even begun.

Arenvald: Who are these representatives exactly?

Lyse: Oh, village elders, refugee leaders and the like. It wouldn’t be right for us to dictate the nation’s future on our own, so we’ve planned a summit of sorts. We’ve even invited the Ananta and the Qiqirn to participate.

Raubahn: Ala Mhigo stands at a crossroads, and this meeting will decide which path it takes. The matter of Fordola’s sentence cannot be suffered to disrupt proceedings.

M’naago: Then let’s execute her and be done with it. She herself asked to be put to death.

Lyse: Naago! I already explained why we wouldn’t do that! Sending her to the gallows might satisfy people right now, but where would it end? Should we round up everyone who collaborated? And everyone who didn’t resist? There would be no one left! And we’d be no better than Theodoric and Zenos!

Arenvald: Begging your pardon, but…might I be allowed to speak with Fordola? Only, I caught a glimpse of her past. A moment of it, anyway─during the fight. She’s done terrible things, aye…unforgivable things… But…in some ways, she’s a victim of the circumstances in which she was born. And that’s something I can understand…

Lyse: All right. Speak with the prison guard when you’re ready, and I’ll come and join you. I want to talk to her too.

Raubahn: I’ll return to my other duties, then─we’ve barely begun to investigate the facility where they gave Fordola her powers. Be fairly warned, friends: she will test you. Don’t let your emotions color your judgment when she does.

(We enter the building to speak with the prisoner.)

Fordola: Well, well, well… So many visitors. Come to have a good laugh, have you? Or do you mean to put me out of my misery? To finish what you started? It’s about bloody time.

Lyse: That’s not why we’re here, no.  Do you remember what I said? How I promised you you’d live long enough to see us win our freedom? Well, I meant it. And not to mock you, either.

Fordola: You’re wasting your time. All of this is pointless. There’s no reason to keep me alive, and you know it! I killed your men─I killed my men! And you know what my only regret is? That I didn’t kill you when I had the chance!

Arenvald: That’s a lie, and you know it! You think we can’t tell what you’re trying to do? That we’re blind? You’re a fool, but you’re not stupid. You’re ruthless. Relentless. You’d give up anything and everything to get what you want. You didn’t come this far, climbing over the bodies of your own brothers and sisters, just to piss it all away! I see you, Fordola! I see you for what you are!

(An Echo hits the Warrior of Light suddenly. A scene from Fordola’s past appears.)

Fordola’s Mother: Come along, Fordola! We mustn’t be late! The imperial viceroy will be attending today’s banquet!

Fordola: All right…Father, what’s Lord Gaius like? Is he nice? Are you friends?

Fordola’s Father: There you go again with all your questions…Lord Gaius is a great and honorable man who looks after all of Ala Mhigo. He’s very busy, and if we don’t hurry, we’ll miss our chance to see him.

(As they walk down the street, a rough-looking Ala Mhigan man glares at them.)

Ala Mhigan Malcontent: Filthy tinhead-lovers…

Fordola: Father, what did that man call us?

(The Malcontent walks up to Fordola’s family)

Ala Mhigan Malcontent: The little tinhead-lover doesn’t know what she is, eh? A traitor, sweetheart. A backstabbing bitch who’d gladly betray her kith and kin to gnaw on what few scraps the imperials deign to toss her. Like your bastard father and whore mother!

Fordola: That’s not true! My parents are good people! They’ve never done anything like that!

(Fordala’s eyes well up with tears and she runs off)

Ala Mhigan Malcontent: Oh but they were quick to help themselves and their bitch spawn, weren’t they? You’re just as guilty as them!

(Fordola runs into a rough area. A woman throws a rock at her. Fordola ducks. Her father runs after her, shielding her as more rocks start to fly.)

Fordola’s Father: Fordola!

(Fordola’s mother runs up to a pair of nearby Imperial soldiers.)

Fordola’s Mother: Please! You have to do something! My husband and daughter are in danger!

(The senior soldier is unmoved.)

Imperial Pilus Prior: Soldiers of the imperial army are under no obligation to intervene in the disputes of Aan.

(Note: The word “Aan” is not defined. It seems to mean something like “non-citizen” or “non-Garlean”.)

Fordola’s Mother: We’re citizens! We have rights!

(The mob is getting uglier, pelting Fordola’s father with stones and debris as he tries to shield Fordola from the attack.)

Fordola: Father, I’m scared!

Fordola’s Father: It’s all right, it’s all right. They don’t understand. But they’ll see in time. They’ll see that this is the only way to survive.

(The mob is shouting “Traitors!”  A burly man picks up a large rock and hurls it. It strikes Fordola’s father square in the head, and he falls.)

(The junior Imperial officer moves to help, but his senior stops him.)

Imperial Pilus Prior: Let the savages have their fun. They’ll be more compliant once they’ve tired themselves out.

(The scene shifts. An adult Fordola walks up to a pair of Imperial soldiers. Her aged mother follows after her.)

Fordola’s Mother: Fordola, please! You already have citizenship! Why would you want to become a soldier!?

(Fordola turns. She is wearing the same face paint pattern her father wore on the day he died.)

Fordola’s Mother: Oh gods, what have you done to your face!?

Fordola: Forgotten it already, have you? I’m honoring Father’s memory.

Fordola’s Mother: By telling the world that you’re no better than a common savage!?

Fordola: Am I, though, Mother? Are any of us? Can’t you see? Citizenship means nothing to them. If you’re not a pureblood Garlean, you’re no different from any other savage. So I’ll play the part. I’ll join the legion and I’ll make them respect me. And when the mob see that, they’ll think twice before throwing their stones.

(She turns to her Ala Mhigan friends who are joining up with her.)

Fordola: Ansfrid, Hrudolf, Emelin. It’s time! It’ll be hard. Humiliating. They’ll try to break us─send us crawling back to our “own kind.” But we won’t, no matter what. We’ll bleed for them─die for them if we have to. We’ll do whatever it takes to be free!

(The scene fades back to Fordola’s present-day prison cell.)

Arenvald: So, you mean to play the part one last time, eh? The unrepentant traitor, whose death will serve to unite the people?

Fordola: Shut up!

Arenvald: You had every chance to kill yourself. Fashion a noose from your clothes, wait for the guards to leave you alone long enough to slip it over your neck─

Fordola: I said shut up!

Arenvald: But then it would all have been for nothing, wouldn’t it? Whatever it takes. That’s what you said.

Fordola: …Been in my head, have you? Had a little peek at my past? And what, a few stolen memories tell you everything you need to know, do they? Don’t you dare patronize me! You don’t know a godsdamned thing about the life I’ve led! The bastards that killed him, the bastards that let it happen─my father deserved better! I swore I’d do whatever it took to make them pay!

(Fordola’s eye flashes red and she cries out as she is hit with a set of Echoes from the Warrior of Light’s past.)

Fordola: You…y-you… All that power…all that pain… It’s too much… Too much for anyone! The things they’ve done to you. The lies, the betrayal, the endless fighting…yet there you stand, unbroken. How…? Why…?

(“You know why. You saw.”)

Fordola: Damn you… Damn you all…

Lyse: You still have time, Fordola. Think about how you want to spend it. Let’s go.

(Fordola is left alone in her cell.)

Quest: Echoes of an Echo

Lyse: I don’t know that we solved anything exactly, but we’ve given Fordola something to think about at least.

Arenvald: Aye… And I’ve found something new to think about too.

Arenvald: I don’t know about you, Diana, but the visions only come to me every now and then. From the way Fordola kept wincing, though, I get the feeling she’s having them almost all the time. That’s a lot of bad memories to deal with…Hmmm… I wonder… Could there be some fundamental difference between one who is born with the Echo and one who has been artificially imbued with it?

Lyse: Well, the Immortal Flames have been scouring that research facility ever since the liberation. There’s a chance they might have some answers for us. General Aldynn’s there overseeing the investigation. Let’s go and pay him a visit, shall we?

(At the Resonatorium)

Raubahn: What news? You spoke with Fordola, I take it?

Lyse: Yes. As expected, she didn’t say very much, but it wasn’t a total waste of time. Arenvald noticed something odd about her. He thinks she might be having visions almost constantly, which is not how the Echo normally works. Have you found anything here which might explain why it’s so different for her?

Raubahn: Hmph. We’ve been hard-pressed just to organize the research materials, let alone study them. To be frank, I’d welcome the Scions’ expert assistance, if you have time to lend a hand.

(The device in which Krile was held seems even more ominous now you know its purpose. The surrounding pods are marked “Supply Subject” while this one bears the label “Master Subject.”)

Ironworks Engineer: The Ironworks received a request from the Alliance to analyze these devices, and I’ve been recording everything of interest. Did you notice the labeling? All the pods are designed to drain the aether of the occupant…save that one right there. Unlike the others, the interior’s been fitted with an array of sensors to measure aetheric wave forms. To what purpose, however, I couldn’t tell you.

(There are black body bags laid out everywhere along the edges of the room.)

Flame Investigator: So many bodies… Every one of them a victim of these “experiments.” Few show any signs of external injury. From what we’ve been able to determine, they perished from forcible aether extraction. Such a miserable way to die…

Raubahn: I know little and less of science, so any light you can shed on this facility’s operations would be much appreciated. Diana, shall we start with you?

Alphinaud: Taken in combination with the testimonies of Krile and Thancred, I do begin to see exactly what the imperials were attempting here. The enhancement procedure entailed infusing a single candidate with aether siphoned from a multitude of “supply subjects.” As for the “master subject”─in this case, Krile─the patterns of her aetheric activity would provide the model upon which they would artificially engineer the candidate’s aura.

Lyse: …In other words, they were trying to recreate Krile’s Echo?

Alphinaud: I believe so─which would explain our prisoner’s present state. Krile is possessed of an unrivaled ability to hear the whispers of the soul, and it seems probable that the procedure engendered the same acute sensitivity in Fordola.

Lyse: The soldiers who guard Fordola…many of them lost friends and family to the Skulls. And there’s a sentry at her door, night and day. If she can’t help sensing their thoughts and seeing their past─

Arenvald: But you don’t just see their past─you live it. All the emotions; all the pain. Imagine what it’d do to you. You’d never be the same again.

Alphinaud: Indeed. As you may recall, Ysayle was completely transformed by a single glimpse of Hraesvelgr’s past. Fordola has been forced to experience the agony of those whose lives she destroyed. The guilt must be unbearable.

Lyse: That explains her request to be executed…

Raubahn: Sounds to me like a kind of justice. Regardless, she can suffer on for now. We have more pressing matters to consider. If the results of these experiments have been relayed back to Garlemald, there will be naught to stop the Empire from repeating the trick. They could give the Echo to anyone─to an entire legion. We must be ready. We must learn all we can of these godsforsaken procedures─and Fordola remains our best source of information. She’ll not be getting her wish. Not yet.

Lyse: Right…

Raubahn: Keep faith, lass. If you’re to convince others to follow you, you must believe what you’re telling them. People will respond to passion─but not if it’s feigned.

Lyse: I understand. Thank you, General. We should leave the Flames to it. Let’s go.

(Outside on the street)

Lyse: I go looking for answers about the Echo, and end up getting schooled by Raubahn. Yet more evidence that I don’t know what I’m doing. It’s no wonder people listen to him and not me.

Alphinaud: General Aldynn is a veteran of countless campaigns, Lyse. You cannot compare yourself to a commander of his experience.

Lyse: I know. But I also know that I couldn’t have convinced that mob to give up and go home. It makes me realize how much we rely on his authority…and how much I still have to learn.

Arenvald: I wonder what he’ll do when everything here is settled… I mean, it’s his homeland. After going to the trouble of winning it back, might he not want to stay?

Alphinaud: ‘Tis a quandary which countless refugees now face: to continue the life they built in Ul’dah, or start again in the land of their birth…

(Raubahn’s son Pipin walks up.)

Pipin: Diana! A moment! I am newly returned from Ul’dah, with a message from the sultana. Her Grace desires an audience with you. She understands that you have responsibilities here, but asks that you visit the palace at your earliest convenience. Well, I must away and attend to other business. Until next time, my friends!

Alphinaud: An audience with the sultana! Depending on the nature of her consultation, this might be the perfect opportunity to inquire about the General’s future plans.

Lyse: Yes, we’d all like to know about those, Alphinaud─but not everyone’s as comfortable interrogating royalty as you. Take no notice of him, Diana.

Quest: A Sultana’s Strings

Alphinaud: Well, the question of how to put the mad king’s treasures to good use shows no sign of answering itself. Shall we be about it, Arenvald?

Arenvald: I am at your beck and call!

Lyse: …And I should be getting back to my own tasks. I’ll organize a squad to head down into the ruins, and then start preparing for the big meeting…Oh, send Nanamo my regards, Diana!

Alphinaud: And ours too, if you please. We shall see you on your return.

(In Uldah at the Chamber of Rule)

Bartholomew: My lady! It was an honor to face you in the tournament. Since that day, I have spent my every spare moment in the practice yard, striving to attain some fraction of your skill with the blade. Ah! Forgive me! You are here for your audience with the sultana! Please proceed.

Nanamo Ul Namo: I thank you for answering my summons in these most interesting times. You have been busy. The liberation of Ala Mhigo will have far-reaching consequences, and there is a matter upon which I would seek your counsel. I speak of Raubahn, and his future. All know the tale of his rise from penniless refugee to member of the Syndicate, and General of the Immortal Flames… Yet though he has come to call Ul’dah home, it will never be his homeland. He is a son of Ala Mhigo. And now that she is free, I thought it only a matter of time before he sought my leave to return to her. Indeed, I had resigned myself to his loss. Suffice it to say, I was…greatly surprised to hear him speak so lightly of handing over the reins in Ala Mhigo, and retaking his place at my side. I will welcome him with open arms, of course─he is my most trusted advisor…and my dearest friend. But I have known the man a long time, and beneath that steely gaze, I spied a flicker of doubt. Whether Raubahn chooses to remain in Ul’dah or return to Ala Mhigo, I only wish that he do so with a heart unburdened by guilt or regret. Yet how can he freely make such a choice knowing how much I depend on him? It is past time that I learned to discharge my duties as a sultana alone. I must go forth and see my realm with my own eyes, and hear the wind with my own ears. Might I have your company for a brief adventure? Wonderful. Allow me a moment to change into something a touch less conspicuous, and I will join you outside.

(Outside the Quicksand, Nanamo is wearing her “Lady Lilira” disguise.)

Nanamo Ul Namo: What do you think of “Lilira, the merchant’s daughter”? This is the disguise I don when I wish to leave the palace and observe my subjects unnoticed. Ordinarily, Papashan would accompany me, but for this particular outing I need an advisor─not a minder. And that is why I requested your company. Over the course of your many adventures, you have met people from all walks of life, in every corner of Eorzea, and I would make use of your worldly experience. Now, let us be on our way. Our first destination is Stonesthrow, just beyond the Gate of Nald.

(Outside Ul’dah, near one of the refugee camps.)

Nanamo Ul Namo: Look upon this procession of tattered tents…These refugees camp in squalor, at the mercy of the elements and Thanalan’s predators both. The city’s mighty walls offer safety, but the streets overflow with people as it is. And unless blessed by the hand of Nald Himself, no refugee could ever hope to afford a dwelling in Ul’dah. Twenty years have passed since the fall of Ala Mhigo and five since the Calamity, yet the plight of the poor has grown more desperate, not less. As sultana, the blame falls upon me.

(“Your hands have been tied, Your Grace”)

Nanamo Ul Namo: Yes, my authority is limited. And that is an obstacle I must work to overcome…Shall we press on? I would follow the road to the Unholy Heir.

(At the Unholy Heir, a huge tree east of Black Brush Station)

Nanamo Ul Namo: It was here, in this wholly unremarkable place, that my mother and father met their doom. I was but a child at the time. My parents were returning from an inspection of our interests in eastern Thanalan when an untimely rockslide crushed their carriage. To this day, it is not certain if the incident was simple misfortune or an expertly planned assassination. Raubahn once offered to re-open the investigation and bring me the truth he assumed I must surely crave. But I refused. Even if my parents’ deaths were orchestrated by the Monetarists, we could only have brought their hirelings to justice. The true villains─those who plotted to put me on the throne as a biddable puppet─were ever beyond our reach. Thus did I plan to strip the merchants of their power and place our nation in the hands of its citizens…quite unaware of the consequences my actions would have for you and yours… I shudder to think how many goodly souls paid the price of my naivety… But I am no longer a child reciting words with witless obedience, and I will not be used as a pawn in the Monetarists’ damnable games! Forgive me my outburst. You are one of the few people to whom I feel I can speak my mind. Come. Let us return to Ul’dah and visit the Coliseum.

(Back to Ul’dah. The Coliseum.)

Nanamo Ul Namo: From the moment I became sultana, I found myself thrust into an endless parade of document signing and ceremonies. For years, I simply signed where I was told to sign, and sat where I was told to sit, blissfully oblivious to what any of it meant. Yet one good thing did come from that ignominious chapter in my life. For it was during an “official” visit to the Coliseum that I first met Raubahn. The match I had been invited to attend was not at all what I expected. They had pitted the Bull of Ala Mhigo against some dozen or so rival gladiators… Blinkered though I was, I would not stand for so obvious an injustice, and demanded to see a fair fight, one man against another. And my royal wish was duly granted. It was not until later that I learned of the gambling ring which had arranged for Raubahn to die on the sands that day. Regardless, my intervention meant that Raubahn had but a single opponent to dispatch─which he duly did. And when he knelt before me to receive the winner’s purse, he swore that he would one day offer me his blade in service. Surrounded as I was by liars and manipulators, I confess I dismissed it as a pleasant piece of theater. But as you know, Raubahn is a man of his word. Though it took him another five years of fighting on the bloodsands, he amassed a fortune so great as to buy not only his freedom but a seat on the Syndicate. And then I had my blade.

(Echo Flashback. Raubahn fights on the sands. After a furious battle, he is hailed as victor to the wild cheering of the crowd.  The gate to the arena opens and Nanamo runs in, evading all attempts to stop her.)

Marcechamp: Your Grace, you mustn’t! The danger is too great! Please, Your Grace, come back! I beg of you!

Nanamo Ul Namo: It seems you’re the one who needs looking after, Marcechamp!

(Nanamo launches herself into Raubahn’s arms. He catches her and sets her on his shoulder.)

Nanamo Ul Namo: Raubahn!

Raubahn: Your Grace! I have kept the promise made.

Nanamo Ul Namo: So you have. And, in turn, so too shall I keep mine. With your winnings, you have become one of the six most wealthy souls in all Ul’dah. And so, as tradition dictates, Raubahn Aldynn… …You have earned yourself a seat on the Syndicate! May your new station garner you still greater glories!

Raubahn: I am honored, Your Grace, and vow to serve with every fiber of my being, from this day till my last. Long live the sultana! And long live Ul’dah!

(Back in the present)

Nanamo Ul Namo: Words cannot well express what that man means to me. There are others who care deeply for my well-being, of course─Papashan’s love for me is as that of a grandsire for his grandchild. But upon matters of governance, I cannot turn to bodyguards and maidservants for counsel. Raubahn, with the authority of his Syndicate position, was the first sword I could wield. His was the only edge which could cut the strings that bound me…

Quest: A Sultana’s Duty

(At the Arzanath Ossuary)

Nanamo Ul Namo: And as you well know, our artisans’ school shall be waiting to accept any who wish to learn new trades. Realistically, however, it will take years for such training to yield tangible benefits. But we do not have years. These people will need shelter and employment if they are to survive, and this time the Ul’dahn treasury shall provide! Precisely where and how to allocate the necessary funds is, of course, another question…

(“…”)

Nanamo Ul Namo: …Nothing? Hmm… If even one of your worldly experience is at a loss, it would seem I have no choice but to seek out someone more well-versed in monetary matters… I wonder, are you acquainted with Godbert Manderville? Then I need not explain his eccentric nature. Let us make our way to the landing, and I will see that word is sent to the Gold Saucer. Godbert should be only too glad to receive us.

(At the Airship Dock in Ul’dah)

Nanamo Ul Namo: I have ridden aboard a public airship before, but this shall be my first visit to the Gold Saucer. I must confess to some excitement!

(At the Gold Saucer)

Nanamo Ul Namo: I had heard descriptions of its splendor, yet I never dreamed it would be so bright and inviting… N-No! I couldn’t possibly─! We did not come here to fritter away the royal coin! Godbert will be expecting us. Come, let us head directly to the lounge and ignore these…these…gaudy temptations!

(Wonder Square West)

Nanamo Ul Namo: I believe this is where we are to meet Master Mandeville. Shall we sit while we await his coming?

(Godbert Manderville arrives)

Godbert: My apologies, Your Grace, I have kept you waiting!

Nanamo Ul Namo: No apologies are necessary, Godbert. My request was sudden, and you were kind to make yourself available at such short notice.

Godbert: When my son’s good friend and the sultana herself come calling, there is no more important engagement!

Nanamo Ul Namo: As to the purpose of my visit, I would have your thoughts on how the crown might best aid the refugees residing in Thanalan. You are aware, I am sure, that many of Ala Mhigo’s displaced sons and daughters long to return to their newly liberated homeland. And you are also aware of how they will suffer without shelter and work to sustain them. I would use our nation’s wealth to spare them that suffering. What advice have you for me on the matter of how it might best be distributed?

Godbert: …The unusual circumstances of our meeting, and Your Grace’s choice of companion, would suggest to me a desire for an honest and unvarnished opinion. I shall give you one. My advice to you is: “Stop.” Taxing Ul’dah’s wealth to save Ala Mhigan refugees is a terrible, terrible idea.

Nanamo Ul Namo: You oppose my proposition?

Godbert: Most emphatically. I agree with Your Grace that the refugees must have housing and employment, but what profit is there for Ul’dah in this arrangement?

Nanamo Ul Namo: Profit? After all you have done for Gyr Abania’s displaced, I thought you the very last person to seek to benefit from their misfortune!

Godbert: Forgive me, Your Grace, but you appear to laboring under a misapprehension. It is a fine endeavor to support one’s fellow man. I fear, however, that your stance is one born of pity─your intent is to “save” the refugees, is it not? For all our potential, we are indolent creatures by nature. If unconditional charity is all we know, then we begin to rely upon it─to expect it. And then we must consider Ul’dah’s own poor and downtrodden. Should they hear of you spending the nation’s coin─not to improve their lot, but to nurture the distant citizens of Ala Mhigo─it is unlikely they will applaud your generosity. Surely it is not Your Grace’s intention to foster new resentments, but to spread good will?

Nanamo Ul Namo: Indeed. …Then any support I pledge to the refugees must promote self-sufficiency, whilst also serving the interests of the people of Ul’dah.

Godbert: Exactly so! Such an arrangement will create a far more equitable relationship with the returning Ala Mhigans, even as it generates the revenue required to win the approval of your subjects.

Nanamo Ul Namo: You have given me much to ponder, Master Manderville. I thank you for your candor.

Quest: A Sultana’s Resolve

Nanamo Ul Namo: Profit… The thought never even crossed my mind. But standing about lamenting my naivety will not do anyone any good. I shall consider my lesson learned, and press on. Diana─are you perchance acquainted with any successful merchants? If my attempt at philanthropy is obliged to reap a profit, it would seem wise to consult someone with a knack for business. Hm… Ordinarily, I would not trust any agent of the East Aldenard Trading Company─but if you hold this Hancock fellow in high esteem, I am content to be led by you. You may repay my faith by journeying to distant Kugane and speaking with him on my behalf. Eager though I am to visit those shores, I have not the leisure for a lengthy sea voyage. Now, assuming you will travel as adventurers are wont to do, I shall await your report by the aetheryte in Ul’dah. A fair journey to you, Diana─and a swift one, if you please.

(Off to Kugane and the Ruby Bazaar Offices)

Hancock: Diana! To what do I owe the pleasure? Or are you here on business? …I beg your pardon? Her Grace the sultana would have my opinion on how best to invest the wealth of Ul’dah? My dear Diana… I have you to thank for this…recognition, I am sure. And I am flattered that you came to me. Truly flattered. But why settle for a lowly apprentice, when you could have the master! Upon matters of profit, there is no living soul better-qualified to advise Her Grace than Chairman Lolorito─a man whose morning “exertions” are said to fill his garderobe with gold! I should be happy to arrange a meeting for you…say, at the Scions’ former headquarters in Thanalan? The Waking Sands would seem a suitably neutral venue for negotiations, don’t you think? Fare you well, Diana, and may your dealings prove fruitful!

(Back to Ul’dah to report to Nanamo)

Nanamo Ul Namo: Welcome back, Diana. Did your merchant friend have any useful advice to share? …With Lolorito!? And you agreed to this!? I am well aware of his standing in the field of business. But I had hoped to keep the Monetarists at arm’s length, and him in particular… …Nay. I cannot live in fear of the man. I must learn how to treat with him if I am to rule Ul’dah effectively. Very well! I will meet with Lolorito. Let us go on ahead to the Waking Sands, and prepare for his coming.

(At the Waking Sands)

Nanamo Ul Namo: So this is where the Scions first congregated… I have heard many tales, but never had occasion to visit. To work, then. The hour of the meeting draws near, and I would gather my thoughts. Pray see to it that we have the appointed room to ourselves.

Lolorito: A personal summons from the Scions─this must be important business indeed. Though if it concerns anything so underhand as an assassination, I fear I can be of little help.

(Nanamo appears wearing a facemask like Lolorito’s)

Lolorito: Hm hm hm hm. You have made your point. ‘Tis indeed unsettling to find oneself seated across from an impassive mask.

(Lolorito removes his mask)

Lolorito: There. Would this better please Your Grace? Or should I address you as “Lady Lilira,” hmm?

Nanamo Ul Namo: Nay, the deception has served its purpose. I am glad to see you found amusement in my little jest, Lord Lolorito, but shall we proceed to the business at hand?

Lolorito: By all means. I must say, I am most eager to hear your proposal.

Nanamo Ul Namo: Simply put, I would aid the refugees camped in Thanalan in their efforts to return to Ala Mhigo. The reparations you paid in the wake of your earlier misdemeanors will be used to fund the endeavor─together with the fortune seized from the late Teledji Adeledji’s estate. But this plan is not intended to benefit the displaced alone. I would make of this an investment which shall enrich Ul’dah and Ala Mhigo both. And who better to consult on matters of profit than the wealthiest man in all of Thanalan? I beseech you, then, Lord Lolorito…share with us your mercantile wisdom.

Lolorito: Ah heh heh… ‘Twould seem Your Grace has matured beyond acts of earnest yet misplaced charity. Pray tell me more…

(Nanamo does)

Lolorito: To summarize: in return for facilitating the repatriation of refugees, and assisting in the establishment of new industry in Ala Mhigo, you ask that a proportion of all subsequent profits be promised to Ul’dah. I am impressed, Your Grace. ‘Tis an elegant solution─albeit one lacking certain crucial details, specifically which industry and where.

Nanamo Ul Namo: How swiftly you identify the weakness in my plan, just as I knew you would.

(Nanamo turns to the Warrior of Light)

Nanamo Ul Namo: Your travels have taken you across the length and breadth of Gyr Abania, and you know the land far better than I. Which of the settlements you visited would best provide a home for our refugees? Which has the greatest potential to flourish, given the appropriate investment?)

(The choices are: Ala Gannha, Ala Ghiri, and The Saltery)

(“Ala Gannha”)

Lolorito: Yes, a quarry town certainly does carry the potential for profit─at least, it would do, were it situated anywhere near a lucrative market. It would cost more to transport the materials than they are worth. In my humble opinion.

(“Ala Ghiri”)

Lolorito: Yes, if a stable trade route can be established between Ul’dah and Ala Mhigo, then Ala Ghiri would once more become an important waypoint. But while such growth would greatly benefit its current residents, I am afraid it could sustain little beyond that…

(“Clearly you want me to say ‘The Saltery’.”)

Lolorito: I know the Saltery and its products well. The imperial invasion brought an end to their more widespread distribution, much to the dismay of many a wealthy gourmand. Myself included. Salt has ever been a transformative ingredient. And in this instance, I daresay it could transform a modicum of effort into a mountain of gil.

Nanamo Ul Namo: The local citizens will need to be consulted, of course, but I trust the East Aldenard Trading Company can be relied upon to provide its assistance in negotiating a mutually beneficial arrangement.

Lolorito: Naturally, Your Grace. I shall dispatch representatives well-versed in the extraction of this “white gold,” and wring every last onze of profit from its production. The loch’s bounty will contribute to Ala Mhigo’s enrichment, whilst easing the burden on the Bull’s aching shoulders─just as Your Grace desired.

Nanamo Ul Namo: A deal is struck, then!

(Outside the room)

Nanamo Ul Namo: I fear it will be many years before I feel comfortable taking part in such negotiations. But I shall not complain. We have piqued Lolorito’s interest and secured his invaluable expertise. Thank you, Diana. I could not have done it without you.

Quest: Securing the Saltery

Nanamo Ul Namo: Our course is decided. I shall return to the palace and have my ministers begin work on implementing the particulars of the plan. If I could prevail upon you one more time, Diana, I would ask that you convey the details of our negotiations to Commander Hext on your return to Ala Mhigo. My thanks again. Together, we have laid the groundwork for an endeavor which promises to benefit the peoples of Ala Mhigo and Ul’dah both.

(Rendezvous with Lyse in the Ala Mhigan Quarter)

Lyse: Diana! You’re back! What did Nanamo─ Oh! Sorry… Are you allowed to talk about your audience with the sultana? So…Raubahn says he’s going to return to Ul’dah…but she isn’t sure he wants to. Hmph. Tell us something we don’t know… But I’m pleased to hear she’s committed to helping our refugees come home.

Alphinaud: And this plan to revitalize the Saltery does make a lot of sense. Quite how you convinced her to seek Lolorito’s help is another question. After all that has happened, he is the very last person I would expect her to turn to for advice. But on a more practical note─Lyse, assuming the interim government elects to accept Ul’dah’s proposal, I have one caveat I should like you to include in the bargain. Ala Mhigo must be permitted to cover a portion of the investment. We have a fortune at our disposal, after all, and allowing Ul’dah to provide the entirety of the capital will afford Lolorito too much control.

Lyse: Honestly, Alphinaud─it’s like Kugane never happened. What exactly does a ruthless profiteer have to do to earn your trust? But yes, you do make a good point. First things first, though, we need to discuss this proposal with the Saltery’s residents. Wiscar─how do you fancy explaining the sultana’s plan to your grandfather? I’d like to hear what Watt thinks of the idea before agreeing to anything.

Wiscar: Right away, Commander. Would you mind coming along, Diana? I might need you to fill in the details.

Alphinaud: Then I shall come as well. Should Watt wish to discuss figures, my knowledge of the nation’s finances may prove useful.

(At the Saltery)

Watt: What manner of mischief brings you young ‘uns to old Watt this time, eh?

Wiscar: They want to rebuild the Saltery, Grandad! Diana, tell him about the deal!

Watt: Well bugger me… We’ve never had the coin or the hands to put the place back to how it was─but it sounds like that’s about to change! …There’s just one small wrinkle in your plan: it doesn’t account for all the nasties queuing up to eat anyone who goes near the shore. The king used to send soldiers to cull the buggers, but the imperials weren’t about to help the likes of us.

Wiscar: Don’t worry, Grandad─we’ll take care of all that. Commander Hext has been talking about starting up regular patrols, and I’m sure she’d assign me to the loch if I asked.

Watt: I’d appreciate that, Wiscar, my lad, truly I would. So, does this mean you’ve gotten better with that blade of yours?

Wiscar: I’ve been training, aye…but mostly to kill imperials.

Wiscar: You’ve some experience hunting monsters, don’t you, Diana? Think you could cast an eye over a few of the local beasties and teach me how to deal with ’em?  Let’s not waste any time, then! I’ll see you by the loch!

Alphinaud: Whilst you are busy attending to the local fauna, I shall have Master Watt explain to me exactly what is required to restore the Saltery to its former glory. Good hunting!

(Monster hunting with Wiscar)

Wiscar: Right then, Diana. I’ve got a spyglass here you can use to take a closer look at these pests. Once you’ve got their measure, you can tell me what to do, and we’ll see how well I get on!

[Search your surroundings for yabbies. You may move the camera as well as zoom in and out. Target a yabby and inspect it with .]

[The yabby’s entire body is protected by a hard carapace, but the underside of the head looks soft and vulnerable.]

Wiscar: Ah, looks like you’ve found a yabby. They say hitting their shell’s like smacking a rock. Any suggestions?

(“Aim for the soft underside of the head!”)

Wiscar: Vulnerable under the head, are they? R-Right then! Wish me luck!

(Wiscar dispatches the Yabby.)

Wiscar: Thanks, Diana. I did just as you told me and the wavekin went down like a sack of popotoes! Let’s find something else! I think I can handle the yabbies now, so we should try something different. What else is out there…?

[Search your surroundings for phoebads. You may move the camera as well as zoom in and out. Target a phoebad and inspect it with .]

[The phoebad’s hands are large and powerful, but destroying its crystallized core should render the salt golem inanimate. You sense power pulsating from behind its brow.]

Wiscar: Ugh…a phoebad. How do I defeat one of those?

(“Go for the core within its brow”)

Wiscar: Inside its head, is it? I’ll try to stab it right between the eyes, then!

(And so he does)

Wiscar: It’s not easy…fighting with the liberator of Ala Mhigo watching your every…move. But I got the job done. Thanks for the advice, Diana! I feel a lot better prepared for my patrols now. Anyroad, we should head back to the Saltery before Grandad starts to worry I’ve been snipped into pieces and fed to a yabby’s hatchlings.

(Back to the Saltery)

Watt: I see you’ve returned in one piece. Dealt with those beasties then, did you?

Wiscar: Aye, fought them myself…after a bit of instruction from Diana here, like. Once I’ve shared what I’ve learned with the others, we should have no trouble keeping the shoreline clear.

Watt: Good lad. A fine young man you’ve become, Wiscar. A fine young man, indeed. Too often of late, I hear tales of folk over in the city, drunk on victory and hungry for revenge, their heads stuck firmly in the past. But we need to set our sights on the future─on things which’ll improve our lot. Things like getting the Saltery ready to welcome our long-lost countrymen.

Quest: A Blissful Arrival

Alphinaud: It seems Wiscar has the Saltery’s security well in hand. I, meanwhile, have discussed the next steps with Master Watt, and completed my inspection of the site. With a little work, the vacant buildings here could be made into very presentable dwellings.

(A messenger runs up)

Flame Scout: Message from General Aldynn! Apologies for the interruption, miss, but the General would speak with you at your earliest convenience!

Alphinaud: Do not feel obliged to wait around on my account. I will remain here to hammer out the finer details with Watt, and act as an intermediary with our business partners in Ul’dah. You should go.

Flame Scout: General Aldynn asked that you wait for him by the main gate in the Ala Mhigan Quarter. My apologies again, miss! Fare you well!

(Back in the Ala Mhigan Quarter)

(Raubahn and Pipin walk up)

Raubahn: Apologies for the wait. People are screaming for the Butcher’s blood again. No sooner have we broken up one mob than another forms. Thankfully, all have been amenable to reason…thus far. But it is no concern of yours. We must speak of the men Arenvald and his comrades apprehended in the Peaks.

Pipin: By their uniforms, the captives were first judged to be imperial troops…but after further investigation, their true identities came to light. I daresay you remember Yuyuhase and Laurentius─the fugitives who conspired with Captain Ilberd in the Crystal Braves’ betrayal. Aye, well…it would seem they followed him all the way to the Wall. It was they who orchestrated the slaughter of the Resistance fighters prior to the Griffin’s infernal ritual.

Raubahn: Were it in your hands, how would you punish these men?

(“Their lives would be forfeit.”)

Raubahn: Hear, hear. There is no more fitting sentence for the perpetrators of such a massacre. And that is but one of their crimes. In any event, I thank you for your honesty. When the time comes for the Alliance to pass judgment, I’ll see that your opinion is heard. Well, that concludes our business here, but there is more I would say. Walk with me. I bear a share of the blame for Ilberd’s atrocities. Had I openly supported the cause of Ala Mhigan liberation, he might not have felt driven to do what he did… Things could have been different, and I’m sorry they aren’t. But even after all that has happened, my homeland is free. With the Scions and the Alliance at their side, my countrymen have reclaimed what many thought lost forever. Under her new leadership, I have every confidence that Ala Mhigo will emerge from the shadow of the Empire and rise once more to greatness. Which means my work here is done. Soon, I will return to Ul’dah, and take my place at the sultana’s side.

Pipin: Father…

Raubahn: I’ll not deny there’s a part of me that wants to stay… The same part that contemplated renouncing my rank and joining you as a wandering sellsword. But I pledged my blade to Nanamo. And I will not betray that oath.

Pipin: Is this truly what you want, Father?

Raubahn: It is. Ever has my sword been hers to command, and ever shall it remain. Thank you for lending an ear. When all the rest are clamoring for me to stay, I trust you’ll send me on my way. That took longer than I intended, but at least you know where I stand. Now that’s settled…Arenvald─what news?

Arenvald: We may have a problem, sir.  A group of Ananta has arrived at the main gates. And I don’t mean the Vira. These are Qalyana─the ones that summoned the primal. They’re insisting they be allowed to attend the council. Lyse is trying to reason with them, but she may need help…

Pipin: Hmm… An invitation was extended to all of the native beast tribes…but we assumed the Qalyana would refuse it out of hand.

Raubahn: We had best go and see for ourselves. Pipin, take command of our forces and be ready for battle. Diana─you’ve dealt with these Qalyana before. I’d have you at my side.

(Near the gate to Ala Mhigo Palace. Lyse and a handful of Qalyana Ananta are there.)

Lyse: Diana! Raubahn! Gods, it’s good to see you…

Shanti: Ah! The ssslayer has come. We have not forgotten how you sssinned againssst the Lady of Blisss…but we did not come here to shed blood. You claim to ssseek harmony with all who call Gyr Abania home. If thisss is truly your wish, you will welcome usss as envoys of the Ananta!

Lyse: It is our wish, and you are welcome. But we cannot condone the summoning of primals. If you want to enter the palace, I must ask that you first surrender any crystal jewelry. You have my word that it will all be returned to you when the meeting is over.

Shanti: …We will do as you asssk─but you will not have our weapons. We are not ssso foolish as to place ourssselves entirely at the mercy of our tormentors…

Resistance Captain: I reckon that’s the closest we’re going to get to a compromise. And we will have people standing guard…

Raubahn: Aye, let them keep their swords.

Shanti: Then we have an agreement. Lead the way to your meeting chamber.

Raubahn: Why do I have the feeling we’ve welcomed a viper into our midst…?

Quest: Return of the Bull

Raubahn: This Qalyana elder’s intentions seem at odds with all we know of her tribe. What think you, Diana?

(“The enthralled cannot be trusted.”)

Raubahn: Aye, it is said that once a creature has fallen under the sway of a primal, there is no salvation. And I strongly doubt the Qalyana have suddenly broken free of Lakshmi’s will. Whatever the truth, I would take no chances. The guard must be strengthened─ideally with people who know a thing or two about primals. Can we rely on the Scions?

Arenvald: I’ll round up our comrades, and send them to the Ala Mhigan Quarter. You can go on ahead if you like, Diana.

Raubahn: My thanks. I will see you in the palace.

(Back to the Ala Mhigan Quarter)

(Arenvald shows up with Alphinaud, Y’shtola, and Thancred)

Arenvald: Diana! I’ve brought reinforcements.

Alphinaud: Arenvald told me of the arrival of our unexpected guests, and I agreed that it would be prudent to call upon Y’shtola and Thancred as well.

Y’shtola: One can never be too careful when dealing with the enthralled.

Thancred: I am not familiar with the Qalyana tribe myself, but Alisaie’s report suggested that they shunned contact with other races. Despised it, in fact. Even compared to other Ananta.

Alphinaud: Indeed. This apparent reversal in attitude is most curious. No one expected a response to our invitation, much less an envoy, and I imagine Lyse was forced to make some rather hasty arrangements in order to accommodate them.

Arenvald: Speaking of which, how should we deploy ourselves?

Y’shtola: If the meeting is to be held in the throne room, ‘twould seem wise to have eyes both inside and outside the palace.

Thancred: Y’shtola and I can stand guard without. That leaves the three of you to keep watch over proceedings in the throne room itself.

Alphinaud: Understood. We should join General Aldynn inside, then.

Arenvald: Diana, do you know of the rear entrance to the palace? It’s on the eastern edge of the city, at the top of the stairs. The guard there should have been instructed to let us pass.

(At the rear entrance to Ala Mhigo Palace)

Lyse: Thank you all for coming. I am Lyse Hext, and I speak for the Resistance. Among you are village elders, refugee leaders; envoys from the Ananta and the Qiqirn. You’ve come from every corner of Gyr Abania to help decide the future of Ala Mhigo. But before that, I want to ask you a question. What was the first thing you noticed when you came in? For me, it was that empty throne. It has no one to sit on it now. No viceroy. No king. Would any of you like to take their place?

(Shaking heads all around)

Lyse: Or should someone else sit there?

(More refusals)

Lyse: Then let’s sit here, in a circle. As equals. And, I hope, as friends.

(Lyse and the local leaders sit on the floor in a circle and begin to talk.)

Alphinaud: Expertly done. Lyse has removed monarchy as a choice early in the game, and positioned them to consider a joint government.  All things considered, I would say events have got off to a fine start…

Raganfrid: …and that is Ala Gannha’s stance on the matter.

Lyse: Thank you, Raganfrid. Another vote in favor. Next, let’s hear from Shanti of the Qalyana. Tell us, how do your people feel about the idea of a republic…?

Shanti: The Ananta wish only that those who dwell within Gyr Abania devote themssselves to our faith… You shall all worship Sri Lakshmi!

(Shanti’s hands begin to glow)

Shanti: Lady of Bliss! Grace usss once more with your beauteousss visage!

(Sparkling light in the room coalesces into the form of the Primal, Lakshmi.)

Lyse: This can’t be happening… No crystals were allowed through the door!

Alphinaud: We can worry about the how of it later! We need to evacuate these people right now, or the primal will make thralls of them all!

(Arenvald looks to the Warrior of Light)

Arenvald: It’s up to us!

(Raubahn cuts down Shanti as people run for the door.  Lakshmi casts an Enthrall, but the Warrior of Light steps in and deflects it away.)

(The fleeing people reach the doors but there are more Qalyana there, along with enthralled Ala Mhigan guards.)

Raubahn: Godsdammit! The guards were already turned! Fools!

(The guards and Qalyana move to attack. Lyse moves to stop them as Alphinaud summons his Moonstone Carbuncle.)

Lyse: No you don’t!

Raubahn: The Qalyana would see us all enthralled.

Lyse: Then they’re going to be sorely disappointed. We have the Warrior of Light and Arenvald to shield us.

Raubahn: Aye, but they can’t well defend your guests and attack the primal, can they? We’re stuck on the back foot.

Lyse: Uh… All right. I think I have an idea. Keep these people safe, General! I’ll be back as soon as I can!

(Lyse vaults over a spear-wielding enthralled guard and bolts through the doors. Raubahn cuts the guard down.)

Raubahn: Come, then! Who will be next to die on my steel!?

Arenvald: How do we fight her without leaving our allies wide open? We can’t stay on the back foot forever… …No, dammit, if I think like that we’ve already lost. I have the Warrior of Light at my side! W-We can do this! Isn’t that right, Diana!?

Lakshmi: Leaders of Gyr Abania…Accept my love. Worship my light!

Arenvald: She means to enthrall everyone…We have to stop her!

Alphinaud: They’ve done a fine job of blocking our retreat…

Raubahn: We must break through! Forget the primal and focus on the foe before you!

Lakshmi: Why…? I offer you peace and ssserenity…Sssurrender yourselves to me…

Arenvald: And give up the freedom we’ve worked so hard to win? Not likely!

Lakshmi: Do not your mortal bodies tire? Far better to dwell in dream.

Arenvald: We’ll keep our eyes open, thanks very much!

Lakshmi: I shall free you from your hate.

Arenvald: There are too many…We can’t stop them all!  Damn it all… It’s only a matter of time before we miss one…

(Lakshmi unleashes a huge barrage of aether spheres, far too many for Arenvald and the Warrior of Light to intercept…

(But the moment before the spheres strike, Fordola bursts into the room, her eye flashing red.)

(A brillant shield surrounds Fordola and intercepts every sphere.)

Arenvald: Her!?

Fordola: What of it? Do you want to kill this thing or not?

Lakshmi: Why? Why do you deny my blessing!? You who defy me shall ressst in death!

Fordola: They brought you into this world over a mistake I made…And I’ll be damned if I let you taunt me with it!

Raubahn: I’ll cut us a path. Stand ready!

(Raubahn Limit Breaks all the guards and Qualyana, but Lakshmi teleports in between the escapees and the door.)

Lakshmi: You cannot flee my radiance. You will all be my dreamers.

(Arenvald and Fordola pin Lakshmi in place.)

Arenvald: We’ll lock her down as best we can. The rest of you need to run!

Alphinaud: Quickly now, while the primal is─…Lyse!?

Lyse: I can’t. I can’t run away from this. They need us!

Raubahn: …Then we stand and fight together. Alphinaud, the envoys are in your care!

Alphinaud: Surely you do not mean to… Very well. I shall see our guests to safety.

(Lyse and Raubahn stay to fight, despite not having the protection of the Echo.)

Fordola: Why are you two staying!? She still has more than enough strength to addle you both!

Lyse: You need more than three to best a primal! And if we let you fall here, then who’ll be left to stop her?

Lakshmi: Pitiful, misssguided children. Lay down your weapons, lay down your heads…

Arenvald: Wha─ I can’t move! She’s going after Lyse and Raubahn!

(The Warrior of Light breaks free and intercepts the Enthrall once again.)

Raubahn: My thanks, Diana! I’ll make sure my steel is worth the effort!

Lakshmi: Again and again you refuse my gift…Do not your sssouls weigh heavy?

Fordola: She’s building up to something big! Come close to me, all of you!

(Fordola once again makes a shield to withstand Lakshmi, but the effort appears to cost her.)

Arenvald: Nice work, Fordola! …Are you all right, though?

Fordola Lupis: This… …This is nothing!

Lyse: Ugh, it’s one thing after another…We have to fight as one!

Lakshmi: Why do you cling to your misery?

Lyse: She’s starting to weaken! Don’t give up!

Lakshmi: Behold…my divine brilliance!

Fordola: What in the─? Her power’s out of control! I’ll shield us, but you’ll have to finish her off!

(Lakshmi begins to blast the room repeatedly. Fordola’s shield holds…barely…)

Fordola Lupis: …Quickly! I can’t hold her off forever!  …Kill her! You need to kill her now!

Lyse: Hold on, Fordola…We end this now! For Ala Mhigo!

(Lyse Limit-breaks all over Lakshmi’s face. The Primal collapses into sparkles and vanishes.)

Arenvald: We…we did it! We beat her!

(The Warrior of Light looks at Fordola, and an Echo flashback kicks in. )

(In the recent past: Lyse throws open the door to Fordola’s cell and tosses a sword at the prisoner’s feet.)

Fordola: …What is this?

Lyse: …I’m only going to say this once. The Ananta just summoned their primal in the throne room. My friends are fighting her, but they need help. They need someone with the Echo, and by the gods, I wish I had it. But I don’t. I told you before that you still had time, but things have changed. I need your answer now. You can end it like Zenos…or you can fight for Ala Mhigo. Your choice.

(Fordola looks at Lyse. Then she picks up the sword and gets to her feet.)

(Flashback ends.)

(With the Primal threat gone, Alphinaud and the Ala Mhigan leaders re-enter the room. Raganfrid stops dead on seeing Fordola.)

Raganfrid: Seven hells… It’s her…the Butcher!

(The assembled leaders stare at Fordola. She stares back, then is hit with several Echo flashbacks. She drops her sword.)

Fordola: It’s done. Take me back to my cell.

(Fordola starts to walk out of the room.)

Raganfrid: You are not forgiven.

(Fordola stops and looks at him.)

Raganfrid: Not you. You I will never forgive.

(Fordola turns away.)

Raganfrid: But I will thank you.

(Fordola stops.)

Raganfrid: For standing against a primal and saving us from servitude─you have my thanks.

(A single tear drops from Fordola’s eye. Then she strides out of the room.)

Lyse: Well fought, Diana. Arenvald. That was a near thing.

Raubahn: Aye, our stand against the Qalyana would have been brief indeed had you not volunteered for guard duty.  We’d be enthralled as surely as our sentries were. They must have planned this far in advance…

Lyse: Security was my responsibility, and I know how dangerous primals can be. I should have─ Gah! It’s my fault. My stupid mistake.

Raubahn: Nay, lass, we were all caught unawares. We will take this as a lesson, and watch our own more carefully in future. You can be sure that the lackeys who smuggled the crystals into the throne room weren’t the only thralls in our ranks. The soldier who first spoke up in favor of the Qalyana keeping their weapons springs to mind…

Y’shtola: A primal’s servant is betrayed by his aura. If you mean to conduct an investigation, I can identify any others acting under Sri Lakshmi’s influence.

Lyse: Thanks, Y’shtola. We’d appreciate the help.

Arenvald: Speaking of help, I almost fell over when Fordola turned up. What was she even doing there?

Lyse: I asked her to come…

Arenvald: Well, that explains it, then.

Lyse: It’s sad, but Raganfrid was right: her victims will never forgive her for what she’s done. But I don’t think Fordola picked up that sword looking for forgiveness. She just…she wanted to fight for her country. If you say the world in which Fordola grew up is partly to blame for what she became, then as an Ala Mhigan, I feel responsible for improving that world. We can’t ignore what’s happening right now─we have to show people a better way than vengeance, or we risk giving birth to a new generation of Skulls… I know it’s idealistic, but I want to help people to let go of their old grievances and make peace with each other. And I’ll hold a thousand meetings and talk till I’m blue in the face if that’s what it takes.

Alphinaud: ‘Tis a long and arduous path you have chosen, but one well worth walking. Rest assured that I will do what I can to help you reach your destination.

Lyse: Thank you, Alphinaud. The first step will be to get our representatives back in the throne room. They’re a little shaken, but not one of them seemed ready to run. We’re all determined to finish what we started.

Raubahn: I will see that you’re not interrupted. Diana─you and the Scions are to stand down. Get some rest. You’ve earned it.

(Night falls. Raubahn finds the Warrior of Light in the Royal Menagerie, looking up at the stars.)

Raubahn: A fine spot to contemplate the heavens… The meeting is over. The envoys have chosen to instate a government modeled on Ishgard’s House of Commons─a ruling body of representatives elected by the people. ‘Tis a fair decision, and one which signals the end of my part in all this. But I would gaze upon Gyr Abania’s stars one last time before I leave…

(The Warrior of Light starts to leave Raubahn alone with his thoughts, but Nanamo appears at the doorway and approaches Raubahn.)

Raubahn: Forget something?

(He sees Nanamo.)

Raubahn: Your Grace!? I─ There was no word…

Nanamo Ul Namo: Raubahn Aldynn. You are hereby dismissed as General of the Immortal Flames, and relieved of your seat on the Syndicate.

Raubahn: But, Your Grace…

Nanamo Ul Namo: Raubahn, I am no longer a child. Stay here, in your homeland. Work with your brethren. Rebuild Ala Mhigo!

Raubahn: You desire to stand alone─I understand. But remember what happened…

Nanamo Ul Namo: I remember full well the consequences of my naivety! And thus did I consult at length with a most trusted advisor ere I embarked upon this course!

Raubahn: A most trusted advisor!? And what of me? Am I no longer deserving of your confidence?

Nanamo Ul Namo: What trust can there be between us when you withhold the truth from me!? Did you think me oblivious to the anguish in your eyes when you spoke of returning to Ul’dah!? For years and years, we have trusted one another, yet now you refuse to confess your heart’s desire!?

Raubahn: I swore an oath to you that day on the sands. I pledged my sword─

Nanamo Ul Namo: And it has served me well. But in Pipin you have forged a new sword, as sharp and deadly as the blade you bequeathed him. I will show you a sultana who can wield every weapon at her disposal─including Lolorito and his Monetarist cronies! So follow your heart…please. You are home. You are free.

Raubahn: Nanamo, I…

(Raubahn begins to weep.)

Nanamo Ul Namo: Smile for me, Raubahn. I would have this parting be a joyous one.

(Nanamo’s eyes are also filled with tears.)

Raubahn: Thank you, Your Grace. It has been an honor to serve you and Ul’dah.

Nanamo Ul Namo: Tomorrow you will serve Ala Mhigo, and fight for the good of all Eorzea. Am I understood?

Raubahn: Yes, Your Grace…

(Back outside)

Lyse: Thanks for shielding us from Lakshmi, you two. If you hadn’t been there, the rest of us would be worshipping her by now.

Arenvald: You’re kind to include me, Lyse, but we both know who did most of the work. I could scarce keep track of the battle, let alone land a telling blow. No shame in admitting it. The Warrior of Light has put far better men than me in the shade.

Alphinaud: Ahem. Did I mention that I encountered the sultana in the palace? It would seem Her Grace has come to Gyr Abania to oversee the final stages of her relocation project.  She was in search of General Aldynn, and I directed her to the rooftop garden. I do hope he was still there…

(Nanamo and Raubahn walk up.)

Nanamo Ul Namo: Are you in the habit of gossiping about the affairs of royalty, Master Leveilleur?

Alphinaud: Certainly not, Your Grace! I was merely informing my companions─

Nanamo Ul Namo: Be at ease, Alphinaud. ‘Twas only a jest. But I must yield the floor to Raubahn. He has an important announcement to make.

Raubahn: As of yesternight, I have been relieved of my post in the Immortal Flames and the Syndicate both…

Pipin: …I shall be assuming my father’s duties. And may I say that Tizona has never felt heavier upon my back.

Raubahn: ‘Twould seem I am in need of employment. Mayhap one of my old acquaintances can introduce me to a mercenary company or some such…

Pipin: You may be getting on in years, Father, but you’d struggle to find a band of sellswords who wouldn’t snap your hand off─your…remaining hand.

Nanamo Ul Namo: Yes, the Bull of Ala Mhigo need not be put out to pasture just yet…

Raubahn: Your Grace has developed a wicked edge to her humor. And you, Pipin, would do well not to laugh when the future may hold the same for you!

Lyse: So…does this mean you’re staying?

Raubahn: Aye. That seems to be the way of it. I would be glad to aid you in rebuilding our nation. If you’ll have me.

Lyse: “If,“ he says! Welcome home, Raubahn.

(Alphinaud looks to the Warrior of Light)

Alphinaud: Well, that was unexpected…though you seem distinctly unsurprised. Either you are more astute than I give you credit for…or I am losing my touch. In any event, one thing is certain: Ala Mhigo will rejoice at the homecoming of her dearest son.

Lyse: I think it’s about time I headed back to Rhalgr’s Reach. What’s next for all of you?

Alphinaud: Alisaie will be eager to hear of recent events, so I shall join you, if you’ve no objections.

Lyse: I’d welcome the company! Diana, why don’t you come along to the Reach as well once you’ve said your farewells to Nanamo and the others.

(Back in Rhalgr’s Reach)

Lyse: Well, here we are again!

Alisaie: Alphinaud has regaled me with a thrilling tale of hidden treasure troves, mid-meeting betrayals, unlikely alliances, and joyous homecomings. It would seem I missed…everything.

M’naago: I was patrolling the palace grounds with Thancred and Y’shtola when we heard the report of a primal in the throne room. I honestly doubted my own ears. As others have said, we were lucky to have our Echo-blessed champions nearby this time, but we’ll need to keep a closer eye on the Qalyana…

Lyse: You can say that again. This whole episode has reminded me just how far apart our kinds still are. It looks like centuries of fear and mistrust really can’t be washed away in a day. But someone has to make an effort at reconciliation if these conflicts are ever going to end. Naturally, a lot of people are crying out for vengeance, but I’ve been doing my best to calm things down. Violent reprisals will only lead to more summonings.

Alphinaud: Indeed. Violence will ever beget violence─as the Empire has learned to its cost in recent times.

Lyse: In any case, summoning Lakshmi was the broodmother’s doing, and whoever replaces her might not be so keen on the idea. We’ll just have to watch and wait. Which isn’t to say we won’t be putting the safety of our allies in the Vira and M tribes first. I plan to have Resistance scouts keep track of the Qalyana’s movements at all times.

M’naago: My parents will be relieved to hear that. What are your plans for the rest of the Resistance army, out of interest? Are we to prepare for imperial counterattacks?

Lyse: That would be a question for the Resistance’s newest recruit─a military commander with far more experience than me!

M’naago: What? The Bull of Ala Mhigo!?

Lyse: We call it an army, but the Resistance is really a collection of smaller, independent groups. And when Conrad passed his command on to me, that authority only extended to the freedom fighters based in Rhalgr’s Reach. He just happened to be serving as the Resistance spokesman at the time, and needed someone to take over the role while everything was in disarray. But that time has passed. When I speak with the other leaders about reforming the army under the new government, I’ll be nominating Raubahn as the overall commander of our forces. He has more experience than the rest of us put together, and we stand to learn a lot from him.

Alphinaud: Indeed. He is in all respects the ideal choice. Assuming he accepts the post, Ala Mhigo will have added a formidable weapon to its arsenal. And given the progress of Nanamo’s resettlement initiative, I see great cause for hope. The seeds which we so carefully sowed have begun to quicken, my friends.

Lyse: I like that. We tend to our promises, and watch as Ala Mhigo blooms.

(The scene switches to Kugane, where a familiar gray-haired Roegadayn Samurai sits on a bench.)

Gosetsu: I do give thanks to the kami that my makeshift raft withstood the fury of the seas… But there their generosity ended. Without coins in our pockets for new attire, we are doomed to look like so much jetsam. O, woe betide the poor man in a city of rich merchants…

(A woman walks up with two dango treats and holds one out to Gosetsu. It’s Yotsuyu, but she doesn’t seem to be herself. She’s wide-eyed and smiling.)

Yotsuyu: These dango are delicious! Will you have one?

Gosetsu: Hm!? More sweetbreads!? I surrendered my blade to secure what few coins we have!

(Yotsuyu gives him a puzzled look, then sits down and begins to eat her treat.)

Gosetsu: Bah! ‘Tis like talking to a child… Why fate saddled me with this burden I shall never know…but I am alive, and I must return to my master’s side! Come, Tsuyu. We shall find a ship to carry us across the Ruby Sea!

(Yotsuyu looks at him in surprise, then gets up and scurries after him, treats in hand.)

(Meanwhile, in the Imperial Palace)

(Two imperial soldiers are talking.)

Imperial Pilus Prior: Have you read the reports? First Doma, then Ala Mhigo─and Lord Zenos put to the sword!

Imperial Tribunus Militum: Do not believe everything you read. I hear the viceroy was merely wounded, and that he has already returned to the capital. Naturally, the savages beat their chests, and boast loudly of taking his head, regardless.

Imperial Pilus Prior: Nay… Lord Zenos lives?

Imperial Tribunus Militum: Deplorable. That our own officers should be fooled by Eorzean misinformation…Small wonder the provinces have begun rising up in rebellion. We must prepare an official, and above all accurate announcement to quell these pernicious rumors.

Imperial Pilus Prior: They would wage war with empty words…Let them produce the viceroy’s remains, then! We shall soon put the lie to their claims.

(A mysterious figure in white armor with gold trim watches them from nearby. He or she clenches a hand into a fist, then walks away.)

Quest: Tidings From the East

Lyse: Auric! Great timing! I was just about to send word to the Scions. I’ve got lots to tell you! The council has officially recognized the Resistance as our standing army. And I expect you can guess who’s been appointed commander. Suffice it to say, we’re in good hand! Having the Bull of Ala Mhigo at the helm’s done wonders for morale. People were dancing in the streets when the announcement was made. And we have you and the sultana to thank for it. If you two hadn’t worked your magic, he’d never have contemplated following his heart.

M’naago: The council has also decreed that we’re to maintain a presence at Rhalgr’s Reach. Lyse will continue to lead our forces in the Fringes ─ a job she’s been doing tirelessly. A bit too tirelessly, some might say. We’re constantly having to remind her to rest before she falls over.

Lyse: That’s an exaggeration ─ and I always get up again. Anyway, we can hardly afford to lower our guard now. Not after our latest brush with Lakshmi. Speaking of which, we’ve been keeping a close eye on the Qalyana, and it looks like they’ve chosen a new leader. It’s, um…Shanti’s daughter. You know, the half-dead one. For whatever reason, the Qalyana thought she was the best candidate. Which makes them leaderless, basically. As things stand, there’s no prospect of engaging in talks, let alone coming to an understanding. But I won’t let that stop me. I’ll keep on reaching out to them until they finally see sense. Just like I’ve been reaching out to Fordola. She still won’t meet my gaze, but she’s given up trying to ignore me. It may only be the odd grunt, but at least she’s responding. I’ll get through to her yet.

[The twins come running up.]

Alphinaud: Auric, there you are!

Lyse: Alphinaud, Alisaie! Is everything all right?

Alisaie: We’ve received word from Tataru. Hancock has apparently acquired information of great interest and urgency. More than that she didn’t say ─ only that we should come to Kugane right away.

Alphinaud: I had a mind for the two of us to set forth together, but Alisaie is determined to make it a party of three.

Alisaie: As I’ve told you more than a dozen times, Brother, my wounds are quite healed, and I would benefit from some fresh air. Besides, you may well need an extra pair of hands.

Alphinaud: Worry not, Sister, I have quite given up trying to convince you.  Whether we be two or three, we should depart as soon as possible. You will be joining us, I trust?

Lyse: Huh. I was about to say I’d come too, but I’ll just have to settle for cheering you on from afar. Good luck with…whatever it turns out to be!

Alphinaud: Thank you, Lyse. Rest assured, should this business prove to be of even tangential concern to Ala Mhigo, we shall inform you without delay.  Let us be off, then. Hancock and Tataru await us at the Ruby Bazaar offices.

[To Kugane, Ruby Bazaar Offices. Yugiri, Soroban, and Tataru are there with Hancock.]

Hancock: My friends! Thank you for coming at such short notice!

Alisaie: We were told the matter was urgent. I take it Yugiri and Soroban are also involved?

Soroban: Ah, my presence here is but a happy coincidence. I am come on separate business ─ which can wait.

Yugiri: My apologies.  Master Hancock ─ pray tell our friends exactly what you told me.

Hancock: Of course, of course. Some few days ago, a large detachment of soldiers was seen arriving at the Garlean embassy. This seemed to me most unusual, as no personages of note are due to visit for a matter of months. So I made a few inquiries, whereupon I learned of a most curious rumor. Apparently, the soldiers were dispatched to Kugane to investigate recent sightings of a certain individual.  The late acting imperial viceroy of Doma ─ Yotsuyu!

Alphinaud: I beg your pardon!?

Yugiri: I, too, am loath to believe it. I saw the keep come down on top of her.  We all did.

Hancock: I would not presume to question your eyewitness accounts, nor am I one to take rumors at face value. The fact is, the Garleans have no knowledge of what took place at Doma Castle ─ they may well be chasing after a woman who merely resembles Yotsuyu.  But a woman who resembles Yotsuyu in the company of a grizzled Roegadyn samurai? I daresay that thickens the plot.

Alisaie: …Gosetsu? He’s alive!?

Hancock: While I’ve no conclusive proof, I thought that such a possibility warranted your attention.

Alisaie: Have you informed Lord Hien? Well, I think we’d all like to believe the old bear survived.

Yugiri: Indeed. While I dare not give myself wholly to hope, I will not deny that I have prayed for such a miracle ever since that fateful day. But regardless of my personal feelings, if the Empire has seen fit to pursue these rumors so vigorously, we can scarce afford to ignore them. I am bound by duty to ascertain the truth of the matter. Will you join me in this quest?

[“Aye. We’ll find Gosetsu together.”]

Yugiri: Thank you. If Gosetsu yet lives, he will need our help if he is to avoid capture.

Alphinaud: Gosetsu is a dear friend, and we cannot abandon him to the mercy of the Empire. Our course is clear.  Hancock, is there aught else you can tell us?

Hancock: Alas not ─ but I have taken the liberty of employing one of the finest informants money can buy. You shall have the latest intelligence on the Garleans’ movements and more besides.  The informant awaits your pleasure in the back streets of Sanjo Hanamachi. From its shining facade to its dark underbelly, few know Kugane as intimately as he.

Alisaie: “One of the finest informants money can buy”… Why do I have a bad feeling about this?

Soroban: Permit me to assist you in your quest, my friends. The sooner your business is concluded, the sooner we may speak of mine!  Should your search take you away from Kugane, my boat is at your disposal. I shall see that she is ready to sail.

Tataru: I’ll give Soroban a hand. If he’s providing us a ship, the least we can do is supply the provisions. We’ll be at the pier if you need us.

Alphinaud: A welcome offer and an excellent plan. Without further ado, then, let us seek out this informant in Sanjo Hanamachi.

[In Sanjo Hanamachi]

Alisaie: This should be the place. Now we wait and see who comes.

???: I-It has been a while, my friends. Yes, yes, a long while indeed.

[It’s the slimy catfish-man, Gyodo.]

Alisaie: <sigh> I knew it.  Gyodo ─ any funny business, and you know what will happen, I trust?

Gyodo: No, no! No funny business! Only loyal service and the finest-quality information! O-Of course…such quality does not come cheap…

Alisaie: …No. But then Hancock already paid you. Honestly, you must think we were born yesterday. I’ve half a mind to call Lyse.

Gyodo: No, no! No Lyse, I beg you! No boots! I will tell you everything I know ─ free of charge! The Empire searches for Yotsuyu. High and low, far and wide. Come to enlist my help, they did, promising rich rewards for decisive information.

Alphinaud: And have you decisive information? Were the two individuals sighted here indeed Gosetsu and Yotsuyu?

Gyodo: Alas, see them with my own eyes, I did not. But the imperials are confident. Yes, yes, very confident indeed. Look at the size of their contingent!  But here is something they do not know… A rumor which you will find most interesting, I think. They say an elderly Roegadyn samurai appeared on Kogane Dori with a beauteous maiden, and sold his katana to a pawnbroker. ‘Twas no common katana either, but one of surpassing craftsmanship.

Alisaie: Well, that is interesting ─ assuming it’s true. Did you corroborate the rumor with the pawnbroker in question?

Gyodo: Ah, er…no. Regrettably, I do not have a working relationship with the master of Shofuku Shichiten…

Alisaie: Now why would that be, I wonder. If I didn’t know better, I’d think he’d lent you money…

Gyodo: Ahem! H-He will help you, I am certain! While you speak with him, I will make contact with my Garlean connections and learn what I can of their progress.

Yugiri: A glimpse of the blade is all I need to be sure. But is it wise to let the Namazu out of our sight?

[“No. He’ll betray us.”]

Gyodo: No, no! No more betrayals! No more boots! To divide our forces is simply more efficient!

Alisaie: He’s right. Given the urgency, we would do well to split up. And so I will go with our friend here. Nothing improves efficiency like a little supervision.

Gyodo: You ─  But ─  Er…yes. Yes, yes. We will go together. And there will be no boots!

Alisaie: Let’s be about it, then. Good luck with the katana. Shall we reconvene at the pier later on? Fragrant as the Ruby Bazaar offices are, I prefer the fresh air.

Alphinaud: I believe Alisaie has her task well in hand. Shall we seek out the pawnbroker?

Quest: The Sword in the Store

[Questioning the pawnbrokers in the market]

Perky Pawnbroker: Hmm…we might have had customers like those you describe. So many people come through, it’s difficult to remember. Perhaps you could jog my memory by making a purchase? …No? Well, you can’t blame a woman for trying! Heh heh!

[This doesn’t seem to be the pawnbroker you seek.]

Pushy Pawnbroker: A Roegadyn samurai and a maiden? Never seen ’em. Now, if you don’t have any business with me, make way for someone who does!

[This doesn’t seem to be the pawnbroker you seek.]

Pleasant Pawnbroker: Welcome, good sir, welcome. Will you be buying or…?  Ah, so you have heard tell of the Roegadyn samurai’s katana. Small wonder ─ it is a fine example of its kind. One moment…

Alphinaud: Dare I hope you have found our pawnbroker? Excellent work, Auric. And that is the katana?

Yugiri: There can be no doubt. It is Gosetsu’s blade.

Master of Shofuku Shichiten: The craftsmanship is exquisite, is it not? And you will be pleased to know that the pledge has just expired.  I should be glad to sell it to you…assuming you have the coin. This is no ordinary weapon, you understand, and it is priced accordingly. But if you are serious, I suggest you act quickly, as several noted collectors have already expressed an interest.

Yugiri: Hmm… The blade represents conclusive proof of Gosetsu’s survival. I suppose this could be considered a necessary cost in securing his safe return…Yet it is not a decision I can make alone ─ least of all when our nation has scarce begun to rebuild.

[“I could lend you the coin.”]

Yugiri: Nay, my friend. Grateful though I am for the offer, I cannot ask this of you. It is enough to know that Gosetsu is alive and well.

Alphinaud: Yugiri, wait. The Scions will buy the katana. Pray consider it a gift.

Yugiri: M-Master Alphinaud, your kindness is touching, truly. Yet, in matters of coin, would Mistress Tataru not expect to be consulted?

Alphinaud: Come now. Our friend would never have relinquished his blade were the need not great. And are we not bound by honor to help a friend in need? I say we are ─ and I am sure Tataru will wholeheartedly agree.

Master of Shofuku Shichiten: It’s settled, then! You have made a wise choice, my friend ─ such pieces are few and far between! Now, if you would be so good as to come this way, I shall prepare the necessary papers.

Yugiri: If I may ask, sir, after he visited your establishment, do you perchance know where the old samurai went? He is our friend, and we would return his weapon to him.

Master of Shofuku Shichiten: A friend of yours, you say? I see. Well then, I suppose there can be no harm in telling you. No sooner had I provided him with the requested sum than his pretty young companion began clamoring for dango. I duly recommended those served at the Umineko Teahouse, and thither did they set off.

Alphinaud: …Clamoring for dango? Can these truly be the same people? It makes no sense.

Yugiri: Some manner of code, perhaps. But it avails us naught to speculate. Let us go to this teahouse and see if we can pick up their trail.

[At Umeineko Teahouse]

Ume: But of course I remember! How could I forget a pair like that? The most beautiful girl you’ll ever see, scoffing down dango as if her life depended on it while the old samurai looked on. Not quite what he expected, I’ll wager!  Far be it from me to gossip about my customers, but he was planning to spirit her away across the Ruby Sea ─ out of the reach of her family, no doubt. When the girl had finally had her fill, they set off in the direction of the Shiokaze Hostelry, presumably to find someone discreet with a boat.

Yugiri: So Gosetsu makes for Doma.  But this woman who travels with him… The more I hear about her, the more I wonder if she can truly be Yotsuyu.

Quest: Hope on the Waves

Yugiri: While doubts remain over the identity of Gosetsu’s traveling companion, for now we can but follow the trail.  Come, let us away to the pier, and make ready to sail. With luck, Alisaie will already have joined Master Soroban and Mistress Tataru there.

[On the docks]

Soroban: Excellent timing, my friends. Mistress Alisaie arrived mere moments ago.

Alisaie: All went well at my end. Gyodo met with an imperial officer and wheedled his way to some new information. It seems the troops who recently arrived in Kugane came directly from Garlemald. The imperials based here have been kept in the dark. And that’s not all. A contingent of the aforementioned troops are preparing for deployment to the Ruby Sea. If I didn’t know better, I’d say they’d picked up Gosetsu’s trail.

Alphinaud: Then your information matches ours. We are quite certain that Gosetsu seeks to cross to the mainland.

Tataru: I’m sorry ─ did I hear that right? You used Scion funds to buy Gosetsu’s katana…at the asking price?

Alphinaud: Aye, well, we were in some haste, and it seemed a worthwhile gesture. Speaking of which, here is the contract of sale. Pray see that the man is paid.

Tataru gets the bill.

Tataru: Thal’s…beard. You agreed to this? Give me strength… <sigh> Well, it’s not like the search can wait. You’d best be on your way. But Alphinaud ─ we need to talk. I want you to come straight to the offices as soon as you get back. Promise me.

Alphinaud: Oh? Very well. I shall call upon you as soon as I return.

Soroban: First, let us go to the Ruby Price. If Gosetsu has already set sail, the sentries there are sure to have seen him.

[ SOLO DUTY BEGINS ]

Alphinaud: Tataru seemed rather vexed, did she not? Ever the melodramatist. I am sure our finances can stretch to a single sword. Remind me to explain the value of such gestures when we next see her. Ah, but I digress. We have work to do. Right. I suggest we begin by learning what we can from the sentries. What’s going on out there!?

Ikaruga: Travelers, are you? You may wish to postpone your plans. The Garleans have launched an attack on the Confederacy.  We have no reason to believe they’ll turn their attention here, but for your own safety I suggest you return to Kugane.

Yugiri: The Garleans bear no love for the Confederacy, but with Doma lost to them, why would they attack? Unless…

Alphinaud: Unless Yotsuyu is on that island.

Alisaie: Even if she isn’t, our allies are under attack, and they need our help.

Alphinaud: We will help them, while you remain with Soroban. Arguing will only delay us. Is that clear?

Alisaie: Fine. But you haven’t heard the last of this.

Alphinaud: Soroban ─ we may need to make a swift exit. See that the boat is ready to sail at a moment’s notice.

Soroban: It shall be done!

Alisaie: What, and you’re going to swim there, are you?

Alphinaud: ‘Tis the quickest way. And you may rest assured I’ve been practicing!

Yugiri: Come!

[Alphinaud, Yuri, and the Warrior of Light dive into the ocean and make for the scene of the battle.]

Alphinaud: <sputter> Haha! <cough> <cough> I did it! <gasp>

Yugiri Mistwalker: No time to rest, Master Alphinaud! Our allies are sorely pressed!

Tansui the Foxed: Well, look who it is. I won’t say no to the help, but I’m not best pleased that we need it.  You’re here for the old man, yes? He’s at the top. You’d best hurry.

[At the top of the stairs, a band of Imperials with magitek armor units are facing down Gosetsu while Yotsuyu cowers behind him.]

Imperial Centurion: Lady Yotsuyu, we’re here to rescue you! Please come with us!

Gosetsu: Stay back, Tsuyu.

[Gosetsu takes a fighting stance, but then gasps and falls to one knee.]

Yotsuyu: Are you all right!?

[The Imperials are flabbergasted.]

Imperial Centurion: Is HE all right?

[We arrive at the battle site.]

Yugiri: Gosetsu!

Imperial Centurion: Damn it! We took too long. Change of plan ─ eliminate hostiles! All forces ─ attack!  Focus on the enemy! We’ll see to Lady Yotsuyu when they’re dead!

Alphinaud: Come, let us even the odds!

[Fight! Fight! Fighty fight fight!  The Imperials summon armored magitek reinforcements several times.]

Imperial Centurion: Reinforcements! I need reinforcements!

Yugiri Mistwalker: That they should still have magitek armor in reserve… Steel yourselves!

Imperial Centurion: Bah, we have no time for this!

Tansui the Foxed: Watch out! He means to blow it up!

Imperial Centurion: Damn it! Reinforcements! I need more reinforcements!

Yugiri Mistwalker: Two of them… We shall need a strategy. Auric, draw the armor this way!

Alphinaud: Have care! We know not what we face!  Back! All of you!

Yugiri Mistwalker: Mist and shade ─ take form and go forth!

Alphinaud: There are too many… Draw them to me ─ I shall finish this!

Yugiri Mistwalker: Auric, my shadows and I shall tend to half. The rest is yours!

Alphinaud: All right ─ brace yourselves! Stars above…rain destruction upon mine enemies!

[Alphinaud Limit Breaks the Imperials.]

Yugiri: Gosetsu! Thank the heavens!

Gosetsu: Yugiri, my friends… The kami were kind to guide your steps this way.

Tansui: It’s over. The imperials are retreating. I suppose we have you to thank for that.  But they would never have come here were it not for her. I had a bad feeling the moment your samurai friend arrived with that woman in tow.

Gosetsu: Do not be afraid, Tsuyu. These people are my friends.

Yotsuyu: Friends?

Alphinaud: Forgive me, but at the risk of souring the mood, I believe you owe us an explanation. You may start by telling us what happened at Doma Castle.

Gosetsu: Of course. I’ll not begrudge you that. As you know, we were trapped inside the keep when it collapsed. But even as the roof crumbled above us, so too did the floor below. We were swept out into the One River, where we would surely have drowned had a stout wooden door not chanced to float by, offering us a raft of sorts. Exhausted, we drifted out to sea, at the mercy of the tides…which saw fit to dispense us on a desert island.

Alphinaud: She was with you the entire time?

Gosetsu: Aye. ‘Twas her kimono which saved her from Hien’s blade, believe it or not. Some Garlean witchcraft in the weave.  But it offered precious little protection against the fall. Though she survived, she awoke bereft of all her memories, and speaking like a child.

Yugiri: A trick, surely?

Gosetsu: That was my first thought, aye. And I contemplated cutting her down and being done with it. Contemplated it long and hard… Yet the kami saw fit to deliver us from certain death. ‘Twas their will that we survive. Both of us. Together. And together we shall go before our master. He shall be the one to judge.

Yugiri: Judge what…?

Tansui: She’s your prisoner, old man. Do with her as you will. Call her “Tsuyu” or whatever else tickles your fancy.

Gosetsu: ‘Twas a name given out of necessity whilst on the road. Nothing more.

Tansui: As you say.  But remember this: our people suffered much at that woman’s hands. When the time comes, I trust you won’t let emotion blind you to what needs to be done.

Gosetsu: You have my word.

Tansui: Well, I must be going ─ I’ve an unholy mess to clean up. You should be on your way too, before the imperials decide to take another tilt. Oh…and we’ll overlook the tithe this once. You’re welcome.

Alphinaud: As Tansui says, we should move on. It would not do for Yotsuyu to be seen here.  Now, if I know my sister, she will already be waiting with the boat at the nearby pier. Let’s go and see if I’m right.

[He is.]

Alisaie: Gosetsu! Thank the gods you’re safe! It was all I could do to watch the battle from afar!

Soroban: And it was all I could do to restrain her.

Alisaie: Can you blame me for worrying? Strong as Auric is, anything could happen in the chaos.  …But enough about me. We need to talk about her.

[Everyone stares at Yotsuyu, who looks unnerved]

Yotsuyu: Um… Greetings?

Alisaie: They tell me you’ve lost your memory ─ and that’s fine. But I want you to know something:  I won’t be taking my eyes off you. Not for a moment.

Yotsuyu: These people are strange. Are you sure they’re your friends?

Gosetsu: I am. They may behave…strangely, but I trust them with my life. You have naught to fear.

Yotsuyu: All right, if you say so.

Yugiri: …

Alphinaud: R-Right! ‘Tis past time we set sail! I for one would not keep Lord Hien waiting without due cause.

Soroban: Aye, and the longer we tarry, the more we risk inviting trouble. Lest you forget, the Red Kojin bear no love for Yotsuyu either.  I shall deliver you to familiar shores, near Isari but out of the villagers’ sight.

[Near Isari]

Soroban: Here is where we part ways, my friends. I pray the remainder of your journey passes uneventfully.

Soroban: Auric, when you are not otherwise occupied, I would speak with you about my next business venture.

Soroban: It promises to be extremely lucrative, and I do not say so lightly.

Soroban: After the prodigious sum spent acquiring a certain sword, it would present a fine opportunity to refill the Scions’ coffers and restore the smile to Mistress Tataru’s face!

Alphinaud: Oh, come along ─ Tataru was overreacting. How much could a single katana possibly cost?

Alisaie: Far more than you think, plainly.  A blade like Gosetsu’s is worth a fortune. Enough to buy a house and furnish it. Which you would know had you bothered to check the price.

Alphinaud: What? I-I had no idea… Th-This business venture of Soroban’s ─ you will give it fair hearing, I trust? He has been good to us, after all! As for me, I…I think I shall look into drawing upon my personal funds…

Side Quest: Hells’ Lid Dungeon

Soroban: You would know more of my venture? Excellent! I should be glad to tell you all I know.  Though perhaps it would be easier to let our anonymous client speak for his or herself. Here, their missive.

Anonymous Missive: For the Ruby Sea and all who call her home, we seek the aid of the warrior who laid low the Lord of the Revel. But first, we bid him make haste to Hells’ Lid and quell the oni that dwell in its deepest depths. Should he succeed in this test, we shall speak of the true endeavor and consummate reward.

Soroban: A strange proposal, aye, though it must be noted that they knew both of your deeds and of our part in them. The Red have no love of trickery, so I doubt it a trap of theirs. And should this client have honest intentions, then for the sake of these waters, it may behoove us to engage them further. As for their test ─ enclosed with the missive was a magicked dagger, along with instructions as to how it may be used to open a hidden passage into the depths of Hells’ Lid. I should mention that this dagger is old and exceedingly valuable. That our client was willing to entrust it to us without a guarantee of our cooperation bespeaks considerable wealth ─ and more importantly, considerable reward. If you are willing to undertake their trial, I shall journey to Hells’ Lid and prepare to open the path. Ah ─ but given the financial incentive, I think it for the best if I went and fetched Mistress Tataru. Wait for us there, then?

[At Hells’ Lid Entrance]

Side Quest: An Auspicious Encounter

Tataru: Hope you haven’t been waiting long, Auric!

Soroban: My apologies for the delay. I thought it best to explain everything to Mistress Tataru on the way.

Tataru: Honestly, all he had to say was that he’d found a way to make up for Alphinaud’s obscene expenditures. No matter how reckless or dangerous the scheme, if it balances the ledger, I’m all for it!  So there’s a bunch of monsters living beneath us? What kind of place is this?

Soroban: Well…according to ancient legend, Hells’ Lid is where the hero Tenzen defeated a host of oni. Oni were foul, evil beings that tormented the peoples of the Ruby Sea, and this island was home to many, until Tenzen, together with the Four Lords, drove the oni into the sea. For his heroic deeds, Tenzen was showered with riches. He then journeyed deep into the mountains, far from the realms of men, and lived in solitude with his companions, happily ever after…

Tataru: And now Auric’s being asked to drive the oni away again?

Soroban: You misunderstand. What I told you was a faerie tale. To the best of my knowledge, no one has ever seen an oni. If anything, many assume the tale refers to ancestors of the Kojin.

Tataru: So what you’re saying is that you’ve got no idea what’s waiting for us down below. In that case, I’ll leave this to the experts! If you need me, I’ll be hiding behind that rock over there.

Soroban: By experts I presume she means you and your adventuring companions? I do hope you were not counting on me to join you in the fight…

[Hell’s Lid Dungeon]

[The formidable Turtle Boss becomes a not-so-formidable, much smaller, tortoise. And falls on his back.]

Soroban: …Perhaps we should turn him right-side up?

[Tataru does so.]

Genbu: Ohoho! A marvelous performance, truly marvelous ─ but then you did best the Lord of the Revel…

Soroban: By the kami! A talking turtle!

[Everyone stares at Soroban. He’s oblivious.]

Tataru: I…I don’t even know where to begin with that one…

Genbu: I trust you will forgive me for my deception ─ ’tis something of a Far Eastern tradition, the testing of strength and so forth. A bit rote, perhaps, but anyway! Welcome to Reisen Temple.  I am Genbu, guardian of this sacred place, and leader of our little collective.

[Below Hell’s Lid lies Reisen Temple, home of the animal auspices: Genbu, a turtle; Senri, a Fat Cat; Inugami, a Shiba dog; Kudagitsune, a Fox; Nue, a Lesser Panda; Komainu, a Temple Lion Dog; Kamaitachi, a weasel and the second boss of the dungeon; and Furi, a Tanuki.]

Soroban: Genbu!? The selfsame Genbu of the Tale of Tenzen? One of the Four Lords?  Under normal circumstances I would assume you named for the legendary being, but clearly this is anything but normal. Never in my wildest dreams did I think I would meet a talking turtle…

Genbu: Ho, but every one of us here can speak your tongue! Is it truly so surprising? After all, we each have lived more than a thousand years.

Tataru: I-I knew turtles were long-lived, but I had no idea that was even possible…

Genbu: In this wondrous land of ours, it is said that a beast which lives a thousand years attains a measure of divinity. This temple is a place where such auspices may gather.  But take not my word for it ─ speak with my comrades and learn their tales. We will talk of the endeavor after.

Tataru: We may as well do what he says. Besides, who knows what valuable secrets some thousand-year-old animals may know?

Genbu: Please, converse with the others. We can speak of the endeavor once you have a greater understanding of who we are.

Tataru: Don’t talk to me, Auric! Talk to the cat…or the weasel. And what does the fox have to say?

Nue: I’m Nue. If you ever need someone to call lightning down upon your foes and whatnot, I’m your auspice.  ‘Course, some faerie tales would have you believe I’m something altogether different. A monkey’s face, a lion’s legs, a snake for a tail ─ ridiculous, am I right? Not as bad as that horse with the head and body of a rabbit, to be fair, but still…

Kamaitachi: Hey! That hurt! You didn’t have to give it everything you had in that fight, you know. I only just went through the change, so it’s not like I was gonna slow you down that much… Well, I suppose you didn’t know it was all for show…and I was probably really intimidating… Oh, right ─ you were asking about the collective, weren’t you?  Let’s see…Genbu’s the oldest of us ─ oldest in the Far East, too, I think. One of the Four Lords, so as you can imagine he’s much more powerful than regular ol’ auspices like me. Ah, but you probably knew all that already…

Komainu: You will go no further. The reason should be plain ─ beyond lies the prison of Koryu. Were you to damage the wards, he would break free, and all would fall to ruin.

Inugami: Inugami is my name. Men speak it in hushed tones, mistakenly believing me to be a vengeful spirit that murders indiscriminately.  There was a time when I killed men by the hundreds, but that was in retribution for the countless creatures they themselves mercilessly slaughtered. It was most deliberate.

Senri: Judging from the way you and that woman are gawping, I’m guessing you’re not from around here?  Don’t know how it is in your homeland, but here, if an animal manages to survive a hundred years, it begins to get ideas. Delusions of grandeur. Some small power, sure, but nothing much to speak of.  Survive ten times that and you become a full-fledged auspice, though. Speech! Magicks! It’s quite the change, believe me, which is why we call it…the change. What? I never said it was something clever.  Anyway! Point is, don’t let our appearances fool you. I could kill you five times before you hit the ground. But I won’t, on account of me being civil. For now.

Kudagitsune: A friend of mine, Tamamo-no-Gozen, once called this place home. Possessed of nine tails, her power far eclipsed my own.  But one day she left to live amongst man. What became of her, I wonder…

Genbu: Now that you have a greater understanding of who we are, I shall tell you of the rather thorny predicament we now face. The divinity of we auspices manifests in myriad ways. For example, I possess clairvoyance. And with my preternatural power have I seen a vision of the Ruby Sea ─ of Yanxia, of Hingashi ─ subsumed by roaring flames. This is no distant future, I fear, and if we are to avert it, we must needs enlist the assistance of an exemplary warrior ─ one such as he who faced the Lord of the Revel and lived.

Tataru: What should we do? What should we do!?

Genbu: Fear not, little one, for I have a plan. But to understand it, you must first understand the duality which lies at the heart of we auspices. The aramitama ─ the primal rage ─ and the nigimitama ─ the boundless calm. These elemental forces comprise the soul of an auspice, and it is only when they are in balance that we are truly ourselves. Alas, over great spans of time, or when caught in the midst of tumultuous events, this balance may be disrupted, and the soul may be divided. An auspice overcome by the aramitama is a wild, feral thing, all the more dangerous for their divinity. Calamity and catastrophe invariably follow ─ tremors and floods which destroy men’s works.

Soroban: Auspices can bring about these natural disasters? How frightening…

Genbu: Perhaps, but you must remember that there are auspices who delight in aiding the peoples of these lands ─ auspices who may have even wreaked havoc in the past. Recall you the tale of Tenzen and the Four Lords?

Tataru: The one Soroban told us before? About a samurai and the auspices who drove the oni from this island into the sea?

Genbu: Just so. Yet I fear his accounting of events is not quite accurate, for it was not oni we and Tenzen cast out from this place, but an auspice. An auspice with the power to move heaven and earth ─ Koryu. Wholly consumed by the aramitama, he stoked the flames in this island’s heart until it very nearly erupted in a fiery maelstrom. Tenzen led us in battle against our mad brother, and together we sealed him in this temple. But as the truth of the tale fades from memory, so too do our wards weaken, I fear. Should Koryu break free, he may well finish what he began, and ensure my vision of flames comes to pass.

Tataru: So…long story short, you want Auric to give this Koryu what for when he wakes up?

Genbu: I should think not! His accomplishments notwithstanding, it would be foolish for any mortal to face Koryu without proper assistance. To wit, that of the Four Lords!  Regrettably, I am not the young auspice I once was. And to make matters worse, my three compeers have nearly succumbed to the aramitama.

Soroban: Kami forefend! Three of the Four Lords have gone mad!? The Ruby Sea is doomed!

Genbu: Nearly succumbed! Nearly! Alas, in marshaling their strength to retain control, they are unable to commit their powers to the preservation of the wards holding Koryu in his prison.  And now that you have a full and complete understanding of the situation, we may at last discuss your part in all this, warrior. I would have you and your comrades face mine in battle and quell their raging aramitama. What say you?

 [“So I don’t get to kill them? Well, it’s still something…”]

Genbu: Ohoho! You are an intriguing one, aren’t you? We are grateful for your assistance. Let us brook no further delay and introduce you to another of the Four Lords.  I informed Byakko of your arrival when you first entered our domain. He should be returning any moment now. Come, come!

[We walk over to meet Byakko, a horned white tiger.]

Byakko: Old friend. The day of reckoning draws nigh.

Genbu: The wards will fail, and Koryu will break free. Before he does, you must quell the raging aramitama in your soul. This warrior will help ─ doubt not his strength, for he has danced with Susano himself.

Byakko: A bold, audacious claim…yet if Genbu believes it true… Aye, the more I look at you, the more of him I see… A similar presence, perchance. A light. Very well. I will bow to my brother’s judgment.

Genbu: Wonderful! Then without further ado, I shall bid my comrade relax and surrender to the aramitama ─

Tataru: Wh-What!? Here? Now!? Won’t he go on a murderous rampage!?

Genbu: Why yes, that’s rather the point. He will be reduced to the feral beast.  And then it will be…Auric, was it? Auric’s turn to do battle with my brother and help him quell the fury within!

Soroban: But if all it takes to quell the aramitama is battle, then why did you not do the same for Koryu? Why seal him away?

Genbu: Because it was too late. As I said, Koryu was wholly consumed by the aramitama. Naught remained of the nigimitama. All that he was…was forever lost to us.

Byakko: The effort I expend to hold back the fury I will instead use to safeguard the calm. It is then you must act. But know that if you fail, it will only hasten my fall. My soul is in your keeping, Auric. Do you understand?  Then let us quit this place. Genbu may not mind the chaos, but if I am to wager my everything, I prefer to do so in the land of my birth. To look on those familiar wilds with eyes that may soon belong to another…

Genbu: When you return to the island, look for Furi. He will guide you back here.

Soroban: Given the circumstances, perhaps it is best that we stay here. Would that be acceptable?

Genbu: Ohoho! Soroban, was it? Be at ease. I have a task for you and your excitable urchin. Follow me!

Tataru: …Did that tiny talking turtle just insult me?

[In Yanxia]

Byakko: …We are here. My earliest memories are not pleasant. From birth I was shunned by man and beast alike, for my snow white fur marked me a harbinger of doom. Cast out and hunted, I struggled to survive. But I endured. I grew older and wiser, and one day, I resolved to protect this place and those that call it home, for in spite of everything, it was mine as well. In time they came to see me as a guardian instead of a demon. And yet, for all I have done to rise above the beast within, I may fall to madness and become the sum of their fears…

[“Have faith. You will not fall.”]

Byakko: Such confidence from one so young! But as age in of itself does not confer wisdom, nor does youth go hand in hand with hubris. I warn you:  for centuries has my aramitama grown and festered. Hold nothing back, for I will not. Warrior! The time has come for you and yours to make ready. May the kami grant you strength to save my soul!

[FIGHT! With the enraged, monstrous Byakko]

Byakko: You are indeed the warrior they say. Not unlike him, in many respects… ‘Twas in another era that we first met, him and I. Long, long before the kingdom of Doma… I told you before of my past ─ of how I was shunned by man and beast alike for the snow white fur that marked me as a harbinger of doom. Bereft of family and friendship, of home, I wandered the mountains in search of a place to call my own. There I would accept my fate and await the inevitable. But death did not come, for I was unlike my brothers in more respects than my fur. With every century I grew stronger and stranger. Monstrous. In turn, what few creatures dared traverse my domain withdrew further and further. Never had I been so alone…

Byakko: And then one day I awoke to find a man standing before me. Bewildered, I rose and bared my fangs as I roared in rage.  “Begone, or I shall rend you asunder and feast on your flesh! What fool has the temerity to approach me thus!?“

Byakko: But the man did not flee. Rather, he stood his ground and said, “This fool is named Tenzen, and ever since he was a child he spoke the language of beasts.”

Byakko: “Then you know full well what you stand to lose. Return to your people or die!“

Byakko: But Tenzen threw back his head and laughed! “They would kill me if I dared! For fear of my talents, I was banished! A harbinger of doom, they called me!”

Byakko: In that instant, all my anger drained away. Tenzen’s words had struck at the heart of me. Here was a fellow outcast, cursed by his kin for his very nature. That night, as I listened to his snoring, I realized I had found in this man a kindred spirit… Soon after we embarked on a journey together.
A tiger and his man.png

Byakko: In the days that followed we met other solitary souls and aided them as we had aided each other… …But those are tales for another time. I doubt very much you are willing to stand here in silence while I recount my every adventure with Tenzen. Come, let us return to the temple. Genbu is doubtless eager to learn the outcome of our battle.

[Back at the Temple]

Genbu: Well done, Auric, well done! You have done my friend a great kindness ─ one we shall not soon forget.

[Soroban is doing a ritual prayer and Tataru is yelling at him for some reason.]

[“I’m not sure what’s going on and I’m afraid to ask….”]

Genbu: Ohoho, you needn’t be so concerned. You know well the power of the Kojin’s incantations, yes? I have but asked Soroban to undergo a little training that he might assist us with the maintenance of the wards. He has demonstrated a remarkable aptitude thus far, in fact!

Soroban: <huff> <puff> How…how much longer must I continue…?

Tataru: Concentrate! Less chatting more chanting!

Genbu: What youthful energy! It has been far too long since we had the pleasure of such company. Not since Tenzen, I imagine.

Tataru: I’ve been meaning to ask. What sort of man was Tenzen? We only just learned the stories, and you’ve already said they were half wrong.

Genbu: Curious, are you? Very good, very good. Far too many people have no interest in the past… What to say, what to say… Well, for one, Tenzen was blessed with the selfsame power Auric possesses ─ the Echo, I believe it is sometimes called? Alas, as you probably know from personal experience, such individuals are often regarded with suspicion, if not outright fear. Nevertheless, Tenzen was a generous soul who was ever eager to aid his fellow man. Indeed, he died as he lived ─ fighting for the sake of those he loved. You see, when he faced Koryu, we Four Lords were still quite young and weak ─ not even auspices, in truth ─ and we could but look on helplessly as the two dragged one another to the brink of death. With the last of his strength, Tenzen imprisoned the mortally wounded Koryu. He then bequeathed to us a sacred treasure: a crystal which shone with an otherworldly light.

Byakko: Oft have I wondered if this crystal was the source of the powers we would grow to possess. Would we have become the Four Lords without it? In my heart, I think not.  We built this temple to strengthen the wards and safeguard the Ruby Sea in Tenzen’s stead. His legacy would be ours, and so it has been to this day.

Genbu: And so it will continue to be ─ but only if we can rely upon you to quell the aramitama of our comrades!  That can wait, though. Byakko needs his rest, and so do you, Auric.

Tataru: In that case, it’d probably be for the best if I went back to Kugane. There’s no telling what mischief that man’ll get up to in my absence…

Soroban: I too should take my leave. Doubtless I am needed in Tamamizu…

Genbu: Ohoho, you’re not going anywhere! Your training is far from finished, my friend!

Soroban: But…But I…can’t possibly refuse the request of the Four Lords, can I… <sigh>  I hate to impose upon you, Auric, but perhaps you can go to Tamamizu in my stead? It may be some time before I am permitted to return home…

[Back in Tamamizu]

Bunchin: …Hmm? So Soroban will be staying with Genbu for a time? How wonderful to hear! I have no doubt he will make the most of his most blessed opportunity.  Oh, I have another missive for you. ‘Twas delivered personally by an unusual cat ─ an auspice, I presume?

Genbu’s Missive: You are welcome to come and go from the temple as you like. Furi will remain at his post above ground. You need only seek him out.

Bunchin: I should be glad if you take him up on his invitation and look in on Soroban every now and then. After all, he is in essence our representative there!

[Returning to the main quest line]

Quest: Elation and Trepidation

[Back in Isari, site of many of Yotsuyu’s crimes]

[Yugiri, Alisaie, Alphinaud, Gosetsu, and Yotsuyu are present]

Yugiri: I will send word requesting that he receive us at the House of the Fierce, where there are fewer prying eyes. If all are in agreement, I shall scout ahead and see that the way is clear. Pray follow as swiftly as you are able, and join me on the outskirts of Namai.

[In Yanxia, Near Namai]

Yugiri: All is well?  Good. The others are hiding nearby. Let us proceed ─ quietly, if you please.

[In the House of the Fierce]

Gosetsu: My lord Hien. I am returned.

Hien: Save your tears for the morrow. For we who yet walk the path should not think too much on the destination. When the hour arrives, we shall welcome what comes with open arms. And welcome it you did, even as the keep fell down around us. At that moment, in your smile, I spied a shred of hope. One which I have clung to ever since.  Gosetsu. Full glad am I to see you alive and well.

Gosetsu: We have played this scene before, have we not? Though this time our roles are reversed.

Hien: That they are. Meaning you know how I feel. Wholly at a loss for words. Welcome back, old friend! Now then, though we rejoice at your return, it seems you have brought with you certain…complications. Rise, my friend. Tell me everything.

[Gosetus brings Hien up to date.]

Hien: The Empire is bold indeed to send a token force to engage the Confederacy.

Yugiri: As acting viceroy, Yotsuyu would have been privy to imperial secrets. The Garleans will not soon give up the chase.

Hien: Nay. It will end with her capture…or her death.

[Hien looks at Yotsuyu]

Yotsuyu: Are you a friend too?

Gosetsu: She claims to have lost her memory, though I know not if she speaks true. I brought her here that you might decide her fate.

Hien: Lost her memory, you say… Regardless, the people have not forgotten. Her face yet haunts their dreams. She cannot roam free. We will hold her here for a time. Place her in Jifuya’s care, with the express instruction that she is not to be seen.

Yugiri: Yes, my lord.

[Yugiri beckons to Yotsuyu]

Yugiri: Come.

[Yotsuyu is frightened]

Yotsuyu: N-No, I don’t want to. Don’t let her take me away!

Gosetsu: It’s all right, Tsuyu. I will come with you. Be a good girl and listen to Yugiri.

[The three of them walk away together.  Hien is perplexed.]

Hien: From a hound at his throat to a puppy at his heel… If this is an act, it is a remarkable performance.

[Hien approaches Alphinaud.]

Hien: Thank you for delivering Gosetsu back to us in one piece. We are lucky indeed to have friends who would journey to the other side of the world to help us ─ and repeatedly, at that. We have much and more to think upon, but as regards the Empire, we can but watch and wait. Now then, seeing as you’ve come all this way, you must allow me to show you around the enclave. I would not have you thinking we’ve been idle in your absence. The rebuilding effort proceeds apace, I’m pleased to say, and we are now ready to welcome home our countrymen who were displaced by the war. Should they so desire it, there is a place here for those who fled to Eorzea.

Alphinaud: We should be delighted to accept your invitation, Lord Hien. And I have no doubt that your subjects at Revenant’s Toll will be heartened to hear that their lord has not forgotten them.

[Alisaie appears distracted.]

Alisaie: …Hm? Oh, it’s nothing. I just thought that Gosetsu and Yugiri would be back by now.

[Right on cue, Gosetsu and Yugiri reappear.]

Yugiri: Forgive me, my lord, but Captain Jifuya is nowhere to be found.

Hien: Oh? He was here when I arrived.

Gosetsu: For now, we have taken Yotsuyu to a private chamber and assigned another to watch over her, my lord. But I find it passing strange that the captain should leave his post with nary a word.

Alphinaud: That does seem most unusual. If you mean to look for the man, we would be happy to assist you.

Yugiri: We should be glad of the help. While I search without, mayhap you could ask our soldiers here if they know anything.

Hien: I will join you.

Yugiri: With respect, my lord, you should remain here. Should the Empire move against us, you will be better able to coordinate our response.

Hien: Hah! And there I was thinking I was in charge… But you have the right of it. Go on, then. I will mind the House.

[Time to talk to people who might have seen the missing Captain Jifuya]

Haname: You seek the captain? He passed by a little while ago.  I, uh… I wondered if I should tell someone, as it happens. He did not look well, you see. I asked if aught was the matter and he told me the past had caught up with him. But I doubt it was that. There are older men in our ranks.

Kaidate: Captain Jifuya? He was headed for the northern entrance when I saw him last. I was going to invite him to train with us, but he did not hear me call out to him.  If you need him, I daresay the sentry on duty will be able to tell you more. Indeed, I suggested as much to Mistress Alisaie when she came asking earlier. Is something amiss?

[Alisaie is at the front of the cave talking to the sentry]

Alisaie: I see the trail led you here as well. This man says he saw Jifuya leave.

Liberation Front Sentry: Aye, the captain went outside some few bells ago ─ and looking quite unwell, I am sorry to say. This I mentioned to Lord Gosetsu, who straightways struck out after him. I hope they will be all right…

Alisaie: Gosetsu too? It seems everyone is bent on joining the search.  That’s all well and good, but someone has to stay behind. There’s no telling what the Empire is plotting.  You go on, Auric. Alphinaud and I shall hold the fort.

[The missing Jifuya is cowering outside one of the gates, looking terrified.]


Jifuya: By the kami! You’re Lord Hien’s ─  L-Leave me! Leave me, I beg of you! Say nothing of this! I was never here!

Yugiri: There you are.

Jifuya: Lady Yugiri. Lord Gosetsu. Forgive me my abrupt disappearance.

Gosetsu: You have your reasons, I am sure. Will you not share them?

Jifuya: I was…I was her master. When she was yet a courtesan.

Gosetsu: By the kami…

Jifuya: She…worked in my establishment.  Her father was a regular client of mine. One day, quite without preamble, he offered to sell her to me. “She may be no maiden,” he said, “but she has some use left in her.”

Jifuya: He sold her short. When first I beheld her, I was struck by her beauty. And yet, behind her eyes, there was…an emptiness. ‘Twas as if she had given up on life. She seemed more a doll than a woman

Jifuya: It was no profession for her, but I knew she would be popular. And so it proved. Men flocked to drown themselves in that cold, bottomless gaze.  The rest you know. She became an imperial informant, and for her loyal service won the office of acting viceroy.

Gosetsu: …While you came to serve the Liberation Front.

Jifuya: ‘Tis said that the atrocities Yotsuyu committed were driven by vengeance. If so, I bear part of the blame for creating the monster she became. Joining the Front was meant to be my atonement. But the truth is… The truth is, I am a coward whose only thought was to escape her wrath. Then as now.

Gosetsu: …I see. Then I shall recommend that you be assigned to a new post.  I trust you have no objections, Yugiri?

Yugiri: None. It would not do to leave Yotsuyu in his care.

Jifuya: I am in your debt.

Yugiri: Who is it that you seek to protect, Gosetsu?

[The Warrior of Light gives her a questioning look.]

Yugiri: Idle musings. Pray pay me no mind.  Forgive me, now is not the time for brooding. Come, let us rejoin the others.

[Back in the House of the Fierce]

Hien: I thank you for your help in the search. Gosetsu has told me all that transpired. I would not presume to defend the life Jifuya led before he joined the Front. Nor will I condemn it. Frankly, it is not my place to judge. I will only say this: the Jifuya I know has ever been a man of courage. That he should feel driven to flee bespeaks the depth of his terror. Even now, Yotsuyu casts a shadow over the realm… But the question of what is to be done with her must wait. The Empire is on the move once more.

Quest: Storm on the Horizon

Hien: While you were out searching for Jifuya, we received word from our shinobi allies: an imperial airship has been sighted over Doman soil. Our visitors’ objective remains unclear. It may be another attempt to recover Yotsuyu…or a prelude to invasion. Either way, the craft reportedly advances at speed, and appears bound for Castrum Fluminis. I mean to go there and ascertain their intent. If we ride out in force, it will only end one way, so we shall keep our numbers to a minimum. Yugiri, Auric ─ can I count on you?

Yugiri: Yes, my lord.

Alphinaud: Alisaie and I would fain play our part as well. We will not stand idly by while a common foe threatens the lands of our friends and allies.

Hien: We would be glad of the help. You are acquainted with Hakuro, I believe? Then I bid you seek him out and assist in maintaining order in the enclave.  When the people see an imperial airship, they are liable to panic. I would have you reassure them, and, should it come to it, aid in their evacuation.

Alphinaud: Very well. We shall depart at once. Do take care.

Gosetsu: What of me, my lord?

Hien: The Empire may well be after Yotsuyu. You are to remain here and guard her until my return.

Gosetsu: …As you wish. Pray stay close to Auric and Yugiri.

Hien: Well, well… Guard duty and not a breath of protest. Now I have seen it all.  To Castrum Fluminis, then. Let us find out what the Empire’s game is.

[In southern Yanxia, at Castrum Fluminis. Hien and Yugiri are waiting on top of a small hill.]

Hien: The area is secure. Whatever our visitors’ purpose, they plainly believe they can achieve it alone.  The craft should come into view at any moment. Let us await them inside the castrum.

[Inside the Castrum. The Imperial airship can be seen approaching through the clouds, but there is a thick plume of smoke rising from its midsection.]

Hien: A smoke signal…? Thoughts, Yugiri?

Yugiri: In former times, such signals were used to announce the coming of an emissary of peace ─ in Doma, at least. But could that truly be their intent?

Hien: Who can say?  Whatever they want, we cannot simply blast them out of the sky ─ not when they were so gracious as to honor one of our cherished traditions. I would not have it said that we Domans want for propriety.

Yugiri: Then I shall go and reconnoiter.

Hien: Nay, that won’t be necessary. We will meet them openly.  I would welcome this student of Doman history in person, whomsoever he or she may be…

Yugiri: As you wish, my lord. I shall arrange for a signal of our own to be fired in answer.

[An imperial shuttle lands and three Imperials emerge. The one in the center, who seems to be the leader, is wearing white armor trimmed in red and gold. His outfit seems to match that of the individual last seen clenching a fist in the Imperial HQ. He is very young-looking, with dark eyes and straight black hair.]

Asahi: Well! That we should be received by the lord of Doma himself!

Hien: I but afford an emissary of peace the courtesy he is due.  Welcome to Doma, my lord…?

Asahi: Ah, where are my manners? I am Asahi sas Brutus, ambassador plenipotentiary of Garlemald.

Yugiri: He is heir to the Naeuri clan…and Yotsuyu’s stepbrother.

Asahi: It seems I need not introduce myself ─ not in the presence of the famed Yugiri Mistwalker. Your skills as a shinobi are known far and wide, my lady. It is true ─ the former acting viceroy is my sister. Yet, bonds of kinship aside, we have precious little in common. As will soon become plain, I come not to sow strife, but to end it. I am of the Populares, a collective which represents the interests of the common man. Long have we labored to bring about reform to the Empire’s provincial policy. Happily for us, our master acknowledges the need for change. Indeed, His Radiance, Emperor Varis zos Galvus personally sanctioned this mission, granting me the authority to speak with his voice. To negotiate peace with Doma.

[Hien is wary.]

Hien: Well then, we have much to discuss.  Will you accompany me to my hall?

Asahi: Gladly, my lord!

Hien: We shall escort our guests across the river to the enclave.  Yugiri, pray go on ahead to the Yuzuka Manor docks and see that the ferries are ready.

[At the docks]

Yugiri: Lord Hien and I will accompany the imperial delegation on the first ferry.  When you are ready, speak with the boatman and join us on the other side.

[In the Doman Enclave. The Enclave is looking much restored since we last visited.]

Hien: There you are, Auric. So, first things first:  what do you think of the enclave? I must say, I’m quite proud of what my countrymen have accomplished in the time. We even have an aetheryte now, courtesy of the Onishishu. Be sure and attune to it, would you? Once it has the Warrior of Light’s seal of approval, people might actually start using the thing. But on to the matter at hand:  the ambassador and his retinue are at my hall, taking their ease ahead of the negotiations. I want you there when the talking starts. It will serve to send a message to the Empire that Eorzea and Doma stand united. I am not normally one for hollow posturing, but in this game of nations, such gestures carry weight. Oh, and should you feel uneasy about speaking for the Scions, Alphinaud and Alisaie will also be there. You need only eat, drink, and look imposing. Say you’ll come.

[“I’ll be there.”]

Hien: I knew I could count on you.  When you are ready, come and join me at my humble abode, the Kienkan. The guardsman will see you in.

[At the Kienkan]

Kienkan Guardsman: Lord Hien is expecting you. May I show you in?

[Inside, Lord Hien is seated with Alisaie, Alphinaud, and several of the other leaders of Doma, with Asahi and his guards.]

Asahi: On behalf of my delegation, I offer you my humblest thanks. Never did I imagine that I would meet the gallant and noble lord of Doma himself, nor be welcomed into his magnificent hall.

Hien: You’ll forgive me if we forgo the pleasantries. You say you are come to negotiate peace.

Asahi: His Radiance has yet to do so, that much is true. Know, however, that he has expressed willingness to cede Doma to her ancestral masters and treat with her as a friend.

[Hien and Yugiri exchange looks.]

Asahi: Since the days of Emperor Solus, the Empire has aggressively expanded its territory. While you may not agree with our founding father’s policy of expansion, I believe there is room for discussion on the matter of his lifelong goal ─ to rid the world of eikons. Eikons are a blight upon this star. They cannot be suffered to exist. This you know as well as we. In his wisdom, Emperor Varis wishes to explore the possibility of an alliance to combat this common threat. On the condition that Doma renounces summoning and pledges to police the Kojin’s practice of it, His Radiance would extend the hand of friendship.

Hien: Doma has never shown any appetite for summoning. And it should go without saying that we will address any threat to our people, eikon or otherwise.

Hien: With regard to the Kojin, I must stress that they only resorted to summoning under extreme provocation. When the Ruby Sea was at peace, and their sacred relics safe, they looked not to their kami for protection.  Yet even now there are certain parties who would destabilize the region with ill-conceived military forays. Unless they alter their course, we cannot hope to be rid of eikons.

Asahi: …Quite. I can but apologize.  In seeking to eliminate eikons, the Empire creates them. ‘Tis an irony among ironies. One with which the people of Eorzea are well-acquainted, I am told.

Alphinaud: Indeed, many summonings are the result of persecution, the weak being driven to call upon the divine for deliverance from the strong. So it was in Ala Mhigo ─ the bitter fruit of Garlean oppression.

Asahi: A tragic state of affairs. If we are to put an end to summoning once and for all, it shall not be through might, but harmony. Yet we continue to repeat our mistakes, oblivious to the lessons of history. My comrades and I would change all that. We Populares have campaigned long and hard for a shift in imperial policy, and at last the Emperor has seen fit to lend us an ear. Alas, there is a faction within Garlemald that would obstruct our every attempt at reform. A collection of pure-blooded Garleans who seek to consolidate their own supremacy:  the Optimates. Lest you wonder, theirs was the hand that loosed our forces on the Confederacy. ‘Twas a regrettable incident, one that flies in the face of everything we believe, and I swear to do all in my power to prevent a reoccurrence.

Hien: That would be most welcome. But if I may speak plain ─ if the Empire itself is not of one mind, how can we be certain that any peace we negotiate will be honored?

Asahi: I cannot blame you for doubting us. Indeed, I should find it strange if you did not. And so, in the name of building trust, I would like to make a proposal:  a prisoner exchange.

Hien: Hm…

Asahi: Under Garlean rule, no few Domans were conscripted into the imperial army. We would repatriate them in return for those of ours you captured in the recent conflict.  Naturally, any exchange would include the acting viceroy.

Hien: Yotsuyu? What makes you think we have her?

Asahi: Forgive me, my lord. Was it not your wish to speak plain? Let us not play games. I desire only to work to our mutual benefit.  The Optimates tried ─ and failed ─ to take my sister by force. I would succeed by peaceable means, thereby strengthening my party’s hand. ‘Twould be a lie to say I would not also be glad of my sister’s safe return.

Hien: A fellow plain-speaker. How refreshing. Very well. Your proposal has merit, but I will need time to consider it.

Asahi: Of course, my lord. May we remain in Doma until you have come to a decision?

Hien: You shall be our honored guests.  Yugiri, I leave the ambassador and his retinue in your care. See that they are well looked after.

Asahi: You have our gratitude, Lord Hien. We shall look forward to your answer.

[Yugiri leads Asahi and his guards out of the room.]

Hien: Well, that was…unexpected.

Alisaie: You can say that again. I still don’t know quite what to make of it all. But on the surface, a prisoner exchange does seem a good way to begin. The question is, can they be trusted?

Hien: Hm. They had naught to gain by divulging the details of their internal divisions. As it stands, we have no reason to doubt them.  But the ambassador’s mention of Yotsuyu left me ill at ease. It made his grand talk of peace seem uncannily like a lengthy preamble.

Alphinaud: You think this might all be a ruse to facilitate her retrieval?

Hien: Perhaps. Though I cannot fathom why they would go to such lengths. Yotsuyu may have been the acting viceroy, but she is not Garlean, nor even highborn. Her value must presumably lie in what she knows… …Which brings us to the little matter of her memory loss. In her present condition, she would not yield any worthwhile intelligence. Nor is she worth much as a bargaining piece. Alphinaud, you are well acquainted with the Empire’s methods. I would have your thoughts on this matter.

Alphinaud: My knowledge is at your disposal, Lord Hien. While the ambassador’s proposal is appealing in principle, it would be remiss of us not to give it due scrutiny.

Hien: Indeed. Though it seems to me I have little choice but to accept regardless. With so many of our brothers and sisters languishing in imperial camps, I cannot well turn my back on a chance to secure their repatriation. Only the kami know when I will be afforded another.  …But ere we continue, shall we excuse these two? I fear what follows will bore them to tears.

Alisaie: I was just about show myself out as it happens. Come on, Auric ─ let’s leave Alphinaud to dispense his copious knowledge.

[Alphinaud shakes his head as his sister leaves the room.]

Alphinaud: Someone is still sore from being made to watch at Sakazuki… Go on and keep Alisaie company. We are safe enough for now.

[Outside Hien’s residence]

Alisaie: <sigh> A chance to relax at last. I know when I’m out of my depth, Auric. Though no weapons are drawn, a negotiation is no less a battle, and the stakes can be every bit as high. One misplaced word and people could die. It takes someone with a cool head, and I’ll be the first to admit that’s not me. So we’re left with the eternal question…What to do while they prattle on?

Quest:  His Forgotten Home

Alisaie: All right, for want of a better suggestion, what say you to a brief tour of the newly liberated Doma? I’d be interested to hear how the people are faring in their own words, and it’s not as if we’ll be missed here. …Or will we?

[Asahi and Yugiri walk up. Asahi has acquired a rather large katana sheathed at his side.]

Yugiri: Auric. A moment, if you would.

Alisaie: Ah, Yugiri. And…Asahi, was it? You have some business with Auric?

Asahi: Business? No. Pleasure, my lady. I merely wished to exchange a few words with the famed slayer of gods and champion of Eorzea. It is truly an honor.

Alisaie: Such heartfelt admiration. One could almost forget that you’re an envoy of the Empire.

Asahi: Oh? Is that so strange? We may have stood on opposing sides in the past, but I see no contradiction in lauding the man who would do battle with our common enemy. And lest you forget, this is my homeland. It would be remiss of me not to at least thank him for containing the threat posed by the Kojin’s vile eikon. Now, if I may continue ─ as we speak, Lord Hien deliberates over my proposal, and I would take this time to see the land I once called home. Though Lady Yugiri is certain to be a jovial escort, the excursion would be all the more enjoyable for your company ─ and safer besides.

Yugiri: …The ambassador has the right of it. He is not like to come to harm with you at his side. Will you join us?

[“It would be my pleasure.”]

Alisaie: In that case, I will join you as well. There is naught else to do until Lord Hien has reached his decision, and I can think of no finer way to learn more about the current state of Doma.

Asahi: It’s settled, then. The four of us shall make a brief excursion through Yanxia.  Might we start at the town of Monzen? I would see what has become of Doma Castle.

Yugiri: Very well. If you will follow me.

[In Monzen]

Asahi: Nay… Can this truly be Monzen, home to the cream of Doma’s samurai? I had heard that Yotsuyu intended to send some few of our automatons here, but only by way of warning. It should not have come to this… Indeed, her savagery served only to incense the people and spur them to rise up in protest. It was folly to think such methods of governance could ever prove effective. <sigh> The sooner we can begin to make amends for this senseless destruction the better. Securing supplies and support for the reconstruction effort should not prove difficult ─ once our nations are formally at peace, of course.

Yugiri: …Yes, of course. If you would have a better view of what remains of the castle, we must proceed through the ruins.

[At the bridge to Doma Castle.]

Asahi: It is a travesty. A travesty. I remember the keep being so beautiful. In the light of the setting sun, one would swear it was aflame…

Yugiri: It is indeed a doleful spectacle. Mayhap we will rebuild it one day…when we have finished helping our people to rebuild their lives.

Asahi: Spoken like a true Popularis. The needs of the people must of course come first.  Speaking of whom, would you be opposed to my seeing how they live firsthand? The village of Namai is but a short journey from here, if I’m not mistaken.

Yugiri: By river, yes. If you will follow me, I will ready our boat.

[At the riverside]

[SOLO DUTY BEGINS]

Asahi: Ready to cast off?

[At the boat docks at Namai. There’s a shout.]

???: Get back! I’m warning you!

Asahi: Someone’s in trouble!

[Asahi runs off in the direction of the shout. The rest of the group follow him. Near Namai, Isse and his younger sister Azami are surrounded by a group of Red Kojin.  Asahi runs in between the Kojin and the Doman children and draws his katana.]

Asahi: Are you all right?

Isse: Aye…

Yugiri: What do they want with you?

Isse: Yugiri!? And you lot, too!? I ─  I don’t know. We were returning from the enclave when they came at us.

Alisaie: It seems they won’t go quietly.

Asahi: And neither will we.

Slickshell Captain: Kill them all!

Asahi sas Brutus: I will not let you harm these innocents!

[FIGHT!]

Slickshell Captain: I grow tired of these games. Where are our reinforcements!?

Alisaie: All this for two children? What do they even want with them!?

Asahi sas Brutus: They mean to overwhelm us. See to their reinforcements. Quickly!

[MORE FIGHT!]

Slickshell Captain: Now! Aim for the younglings!

Asahi sas Brutus: Stand in front of them! We’ll bear the brunt of it!

Yugiri Mistwalker: If they would call for reinforcements, then so shall we!  Quickly! Protect the children!

Asahi sas Brutus: Hold your ground! I will try to draw away their reinforcements.

[FIGHTY FIGHT FIGHT!  Despite the Red Kojin calling in reinforcements several times, they are eventually all defeated.]

Asahi: That seems to be the last of them.

[Asahi adresses Azami]

Asahi: You have nothing to fear, child. You are safe now.

Azami: Thank you, sir…

Isse: You saved us again. Thank you. If you’re ever passing by our village, look us up. You’ll always be welcome.

Asahi: Thank goodness we arrived when we did.

Alisaie: Indeed. But what could have prompted the Red Kojin to stray so far from the Ruby Sea?

Asahi: I presume these are the sellswords hired by Yotsuyu?  If so, the answer is simple:  desperation. Bereft of imperial employment, they seek other means to line their coinpurses. Another sad legacy of the Empire’s mismanagement.

Yugiri: The Empire to which you have sworn allegiance.

Asahi: Must you always be so pointed? If we are to bring about lasting change, we must look beyond narrow allegiances. You have every right to doubt me, but in time I hope you will come to see that we share a common goal. You and yours have fought fiercely to change the Empire from without, but if we are to end the cycle of conflict, the Empire must change from within. Am I wrong?

[“Not about that. True reform can only come from within.”]

Asahi: I knew you would understand. You have witnessed such change firsthand, after all, during your time in Ishgard. Dear me… I had hoped to convey my views on our nations’ shared hopes under more peaceable circumstances. Yet this regrettable little interlude did afford me a chance to see the famed hero of Eorzea in action, and few imperial soldiers can say that. At least, few who lived to tell the tale.

Quest: A Guilty Conscience

Asahi: Well, after that little ordeal, I believe it may be time for us to return to the enclave.

Alisaie: Return, my lord? But what of Namai? You seemed so eager to observe the villagers going about their daily lives.

Asahi: To be frank, I still am. But I rather doubt the good people of Namai would take kindly to the sight of a man in imperial uniform with blood still dripping from his blade. Even in your company, my presence would only prove a distraction.  Fret not, however. Thanks to the three of you, I have seen a great deal more than I otherwise would. And with any luck, Lord Hien will have finished considering my proposal by the time we return.

[Back in the Doman Enclave]

Yugiri: Thank you again for agreeing to join me. If not for your aid, the Kojin may well have overwhelmed us. Pray go on ahead. Lord Hien is expecting you. I will remain without and keep watch over our guest.

Alisaie: Well, we had best not keep him waiting.

[In Hien’s hall]

Hien: Welcome back, my friend. Yugiri tells me you accompanied her and Asahi on a tour of Yanxia. I had hoped you might take the opportunity to recover from your exertions at Sakazuki… But I gather your time was well spent. Until the ambassador affords Yugiri a chance to make a full report, however, I must rely on you to supply the details. So please ─ tell us how it all unfolded.

Alphinaud: The Red Kojin? Here? Have there been any other such incidents since the liberation?

Hien: Only one, that I am aware of. If they are planning some new venture here in Yanxia, we will need to increase patrols.  In any event, I am indebted to you for fighting them off. But tell me ─ and don’t be modest ─ was Asahi truly the first to leap to the youngsters’ aid?

Alisaie: He was. I was quick to doubt him when we first met, but his desire to save them seemed quite genuine. It’s possible he truly believes what he’s saying.

Hien: In the time I’ve known you, you have always been an excellent judge of character. What do you make of the ambassador?

[“I still don’t think he can be trusted.”]

Hien: Then the question of what his true intention may be remains.  Regardless of his aim, I am resigned to playing his game. For now, at least.

Alisaie: Well, forswearing summoning should be simple enough, considering you never dabbled in it in the first place ─ which just leaves the somewhat thornier question of how to police the Red Kojin.

Hien: It was with that very question in mind that I sought Alphinaud’s counsel. Thanks to his knowledge of the eikons and the rituals used to invoke them, I believe we’ve identified a workable solution.

Alphinaud: As you will recall, Susano was summoned forth using the power of relics locked away in the Kojin’s treasure vault on the Isle of Zekki. Though said relics remain there to this day, it is all but certain that the act of summoning exhausted their stores of aether making subsequent summonings impossible.  Assuming that is the case, preventing the primal’s return rests on denying the Red Kojin the means to amass new stores of aether, either via the acquisition of crystals or the relics they are wont to collect.

Hien: For this, I plan to enlist the aid of our friends the Blue Kojin. Since Doma’s liberation, we have forged closer bonds with Bunchin and his people, and with their support, I am quite confident we can keep the Red from obtaining what they require to call upon this Susano.

Alisaie: And what of the prisoners?

Hien: They will be exchanged as agreed, and I will give full credit to Asahi for the success of the transaction. If there is aught we can do to help the Populares garner favor, I mean to see it done.  But first, I have some unfinished business to attend to. Would you all come with me?

Alisaie: Yes, of course, but…what manner of business?

Hien: A past mistake which I would see put right. One which has weighed heavy on my mind…

[The group walks down the hall to where Gosetsu and Yotsuyu are being housed.]

Hien: I had her brought here in secret while the three of you kept our guest company.

[Hien draws his katana and levels it at Yotsuyu, who is sitting on a mat eating sweets.]

Hien: Yet here you are, the living, breathing proof of my failure. A failure for which I would now make amends.

Yotsuyu: What did I do? I don’t remember. Was it really so terrible? Tell me, please! What did I do!?

Gosetsu: You speak of sins, my lord, but at whose feet do those sins lie? With the soldiers who committed the crimes, or those who commanded them to do so? With both, I would say, for all have a conscience, and all must choose. But with no memory of who she is or what she has done, what sin remains to be cleansed?

Hien: You ask that I show mercy?

Gosetsu: I ask why the heavens saw fit to deny me my rest. Why Yotsuyu was spared not only death but the bitter memories of her life.

Hien: You truly think it the will of the kami…

[Hien sheathes his katana.]

Hien: If so, her life is not mine to take. It is yours to safeguard. Come the hour of the exchange, if her memories have not returned, she may remain here in Doma to live out her days as Tsuyu. But if they do, the Garleans shall have their viceroy. Though the people will protest, they will come to accept my decision when they have been reunited with their loved ones.

Gosetsu: Thank you, my lord.

Hien: Now, then. I believe we have kept our guest waiting long enough.

[The group heads out to return to the meeting hall, but Hien holds back. He turns to the Warrior of Light.]

Hien: Did Gosetsu not seem strange to you? His sympathy for Yotsuyu apart, I mean. I know his powers of endurance only too well, but after all he has suffered, even he should not be on his feet. He puts on a brave face for our sakes, but it would not surprise me if he lacked the strength to raise his blade. …Though I suppose if he and Yotsuyu are to enjoy a life of peace and quiet, he will have little use for it. It falls to us to shape that future. One in which he need never again set foot on the battlefield.

Quest: Rise of a New Sun

[In the meeting hall, Asahi and his guards arrive and take their seats.]

Hien: My apologies. Our deliberations took longer than expected.

Asahi: Think nothing of it. The time afforded me the opportunity to go on a rather rousing excursion through Yanxia.  You have reached a decision, then?

Hien: We are willing to cooperate with you in combating the eikon threat, and also in the exchange of prisoners. Assuming you accept our conditions, of course.  As you know, your sister is in our care. Due to certain complications, however, we are hesitant to release her into your custody.

Asahi: Complications?

Hien: She was inside Doma Castle when it collapsed. Though she survived, she remembers nothing of her past life ─ not even her name.  To clarify, she is in our care not as a prisoner, but as a vulnerable citizen of Doma.

Asahi: Are you saying you refuse to release her?

Hien: Not at all. If her memory returns before the appointed hour.

Asahi: And if not, what exactly…? You will accommodate her here in Doma?

Hien: Well, I sincerely doubt she will be of any great strategic value to the Empire. She spends her days daydreaming of dango.

Asahi: Dango…?  …How dreadful.

[Asahi seems genuinely upset by this news.]

Asahi: Very well. In light of our recent…misstep in Sakazuki, it seems only fair that I show you the same understanding you have shown us.  …Though I do have one, small request. Regardless of Yotsuyu’s value to the Empire, she is yet my sister. Before I leave, might you permit me to speak with her in private?

Hien: Of course. Perhaps you could even bring her a plate of dango. She would be most pleased.  Yugiri will see you to her chambers.

[Asahi is shown to his sister’s room. The group waits outside.]

Gosetsu: Forgive me, my lord, but…has he not been gone overlong? Perhaps I should ─

Hien: Calm yourself, Gosetsu. I understand your concern, but we have to wait. He deserves that much.

Asahi: I am sorry to have kept you all waiting. Thank you for your understanding.  Long did I dream of this reunion, but never did I imagine it would be so joyless. A part of me hoped your stories of her condition were just that. But alas, it is as you say.

Gosetsu: Tsuyu… Do you remember anything of this man? Anything at all?

Yotsuyu: I… No.

Asahi: I am a stranger to her. That much was clear to me from a single look. I leave her in your care.

Hien: As you wish.

Asahi: Now, if you will excuse me, my superiors are long overdue a report. They will be elated to hear of our agreement, of that I have no doubt.  As for the exchange itself, once I have obtained the relevant permissions, I will arrange for your people to be relieved of their various duties, and sent here to Yanxia. This will take time, of course…

Hien: Of course. You may rest assured your soldiers will be well cared for until your return. We will also begin taking steps to better counter the threat of the Kojin and their eikon.  Before you take your leave ─ there is one other matter… I am informed it was you who took the lead in rescuing two young Domans from a band of Kojin sellswords. I have not yet had the time to thank you properly.

Asahi: Please, there is no need to thank me. I only did what anyone would do under the circumstances. Fortunately, I was in good company at the time.  The blight of the Red Kojin is of the Empire’s making. Were it not for our transgressions, those children would not have needed saving.  The people of Doma have suffered enough, my lord. And I promise to do all in my power to spare them further pain, be it at the hands of the Kojin, or indeed the Empire.

Hien: I pray the Emperor will see things as you do. There may yet be hope for us all.

Asahi: Until we meet again.

[Asahi and his guards take their leave.]

Hien: Gosetsu. As before, I leave Yotsuyu to you.  I invite the rest of you to join me outside. Let’s treat Asahi to a proper farewell.

[Outside Hien’s hall]

Hien: The ambassador’s airship awaits at Castrum Fluminis. Let us be off.

[At Castrum Fluminis]

Hien: I wish you a safe journey.

Asahi: This has been a most enjoyable visit. I look forward to our next meeting.  Maxima, would you take the others and see that all is ready for our departure?

[Asahi’s guard Maxima nods and leaves with the other guard.]

Asahi: I simply cannot leave without first giving thanks to the Warrior of Light for accompanying me through Yanxia.

[Asahi draws the Warrior of Light aside. He first checks carefully to make sure Hien and Yugiri are not watching. Then suddenly, his face twists with rage.]

Asahi: Mark me, savior of the savages. There will be a reckoning.

[ECHO FLASHBACK!]

[A younger Asahi and a companion are in Imperial uniforms are pinned down by a group of Doman soldiers.]

Liberation Front Samurai: You’ve nowhere left to run, traitor!

Asahi: Ignorant savages. Killing us will avail you naught.  For every imperial you cut down, a thousand more will come. Abandon this foolish endeavor and surrender. You may yet serve our righteous cause.

[The Domans draw their katanas.]

Liberation Front Samurai: How dare you speak of righteousness! You who forsook kith and kin to serve conquerors!  Be glad I grant you this mercy.

[The Doman leader moves to cut down Asahi, but he and his men are knocked aside by a rush of wind.]

Liberation Front Samurai: Reinforcements? …No ─ just one. Cut him down!

[It’s Zenos. He single-handedly kills the Doman soldiers, saving Asahi.]

Asahi: Thank you. Thank you, sir!

Zenos yae Galvus: This one is…promising.  Who remains to offer us resistance?

Asahi: A…a host of rebels led by Lord Kaien hold the enclave across the river.

Zenos yae Galvus: Lord Kaien.

Asahi: The king of ─ th-the former king of Doma, sir. They say he is one of the greatest swordsmen alive.

Zenos yae Galvus: Is that what they say.

Asahi: Who…was that…?

Wounded Imperial: Surely you jest? That was Zenos yae Galvus, Legatus of the XIIth ─ the crown bloody prince! I’d heard he was strong, but that…that was frightening.

[The Echo flashback ends]

[In the present Asahi is still snarling furiously at the Warrior of Light.]

Asahi: Everything you are ─ your power, even your face ─ it vexes me.

[Suddenly Asahi’s expression returns to its usual smooth, pleasant, and utterly false demeanor.]

Asahi: Go on. Lash out like the beast you are. At an emissary. And jeopardize the newfound peace between Doma and the Empire.My lord was destined to lead us unto a glorious new age. Your light is nothing to his radiance. I will cherish this moment ─ lock it away within my heart ─ until the day we meet again.

[Asahi enters his shuttle and returns to his airship.]

Hien: You look troubled, my friend. Was it something he said?

[The Warrior of Light explains what just happened.]

Alisaie: Of all the memories to witness.

Yugiri: I had my doubts about him, but I would never have guessed he was a disciple of Zenos.  My lord ─

Hien: Calm yourself, Yugiri. I set no store by him or his enlightened brethren. But if by treating with them there is even the faintest hope we might secure the return of our conscripted brothers and sisters, I must play this game. After the way I risked their lives in the rebellion, I owe them that much.

Yugiri: My lord, you bear no blame for their fate.

Hien: If not blame then responsibility. They were prisoners and still I chose to fight, knowing they could be executed in retaliation.  But now we have a chance to bring them home. If it means bargaining with a monster, so be it.

Yugiri: My lord…

Hien: Besides, I think he likes me. Which is more than some can say.

[The Warrior of Light rolls his eyes.]

Alisaie: It makes no sense. Why would he bother keeping up the pretense for so long, only to drop it right before the very end?

Alphinaud: Perhaps he no longer thought it necessary, having secured Doma’s cooperation in the prisoner exchange.

Hien: If he truly is a disciple of Zenos, ’tis possible emotions simply got the better of him. Remaining calm around the man who slew his lord will have taken its toll. Whatever the explanation, now is not the time for hasty reprisals. We shall proceed as planned. The Red Kojin must be placed under surveillance and the Garlean prisoners made ready for the exchange…But you need not concern yourself with the details. Leave the affairs of Doma to us. When the hour of the exchange draws near, we will call for you.

Alphinaud: I should certainly hope so. Whatever the Empire’s true intent, we would be on hand to play our part, either to defend Doma, or to help usher in a lasting peace.  I had thought we might use this time to return to Eorzea, but given the volatility of the situation, mayhap it would be best if we remained in Kugane.

Alisaie: Agreed. Between Yotsuyu’s amnesia and Asahi’s dubious agenda, I’d say we have ample reason to remain in the neighborhood. If anything should happen ─ anything at all ─ you must send for us at once.

Hien: Oh, I will. On that you have my word. Charting a path through this sea of troubles promises to be difficult enough. I am not so proud as to attempt the feat alone.

Alphinaud: To Kugane, then. Tataru and the others must know of what transpired here.

[Back in Kugane, at the Ruby Bazaar]

Hancock: …My. It seems you’re all in quite the predicament. Well, should we receive any urgent missives from Doma, rest assured you will be the first to know of it.

Tataru: Yes, of course. We’re pursuing a number of ventures to replenish our coffers, but I suppose that all can wait if any urgent news should come through the office.

Alphinaud: Ah… Ahem. About that… I wish to apologize, Tataru. It was reckless of me to make such a purchase without first consulting you. You may be certain, however, that I mean to reimburse the Scions, even if it means drawing upon my personal funds.

Tataru: That’s very thoughtful of you, but I’m sure it won’t come to that.  If Soroban’s business proposition is as promising as it sounds, Auric should have no difficulty wiping the red from our ledger.

Alphinaud: Forgive me, Auric. It would seem I have unwittingly heaped my financial troubles upon you. I swear I will pay you back. Though I fear I will struggle to cobble together anything of monetary value, knowledge I can gather in abundance. To start, I plan to investigate the divisions forming within the Empire. Mayhap Riol and his associates have heard something on the subject… Regardless, the more we know about the politics of Garlemald, the better our chances of predicting the imperials’ next move, which might yield you an advantage on the day of the prisoner exchange. Knowing what we do of Asahi’s apparent resentment towards you, I cannot say what he hopes to gain from it. But if there is even the faintest chance that a lasting peace could be forged between Doma and the Empire, what choice have we but to try? Lord Hien had the right of it Asahi may very well be a monster, but we must play his game. For now.

[On Asahi’s airship]

Asahi: Arranging the prisoner exchange proved easier than I thought.  Yes, my lord will be most pleased. Everything is going according to plan.

[In Hien’s hall in Doma, Yotsuyu stares into a silver mirror.]

[Flashback to Asahi’s visit.]

Asahi: Can you truly remember nothing? Nothing at all?

Yotsuyu: Were we…friends…?

Asahi: Yes. We were good friends, you and I. In fact, I’ve brought you a gift.

[Asahi gives Yotsuyu the silver mirror.]

Asahi: I pray that one day soon, as you gaze into that mirror, you will remember the woman staring back at you.

[Back to now]

[Yotsuyu stares into the mirror.]

Yotsuyu: It’s so pretty. Who are you…? Who are you…?

[In the Imperial capital, in a medical facility. A bearded doctor approaches a bed with a man seated on it, his back to the door.]

Imperial Medicus: How are you feeling, my lord?

???: Fine. Now leave me.

[The man on the bed, neck and arms bandaged, is Zenos.]


[Kugane, the Ruby Bazaar, East Aldenard Trading Company offices. The twins, Tataru, and Hancock are there.]

Quest: Gosetsu and Tsuyu

Alphinaud: Ah, Auric, impeccable timing. We have just received a letter from Lord Hien. He writes that the Domans are coordinating their efforts with the Blue Kojin to maintain a constant watch over the Red. By staying on the lookout for signs of crystal hoarding and the like, they mean to nip any summoning attempts in the bud, thereby satisfying the conditions for peace set down by the ambassador. For the Garleans’ part, the Populares have sent word that a vessel bearing Doman conscripts is soon to arrive in Yanxia. ‘Twould seem that the prisoner exchange is to proceed as planned. Lord Hien requests your presence, and I share his view that you should be on hand at this critical juncture.

Alisaie: According to the letter, Yotsuyu’s memory has yet to return, so it looks like she’ll be living out the rest of her days in Doma─assuming the ambassador means to honor the agreement, of course. Before we get to that, however, I think it would be wise to assess her condition one last time. If the Domans have missed any change in her mental state, however slight, it would be better if Asahi weren’t the one to spot it.

Alphinaud: Agreed. Let us make straightways for the enclave, then. Lord Hien will be waiting. I trust you will cope in our absence, Tataru?

Tataru: Don’t worry about me─I’ll be fine! Just be sure to come back safely!

[The Doman Enclave, the Kienkan. The twins have arrived as well.]

Hien: Ah, I see my letter reached you across the Ruby Sea! Thank you for coming so swiftly. Though I wrote at some length on the subject of the forthcoming exchange, there was one other matter I neglected to mention… It concerns Gosetsu. As you may have observed, he returned from his ordeal rather the worse for wear, and despite his best efforts to conceal his condition─or perhaps because of them─he recently collapsed.

Alphinaud: Good gods! Is he all right!?

Hien: Confined to bed and grumbling without cease, but he has shown signs of recovery. He made me promise not to tell you, lest you worry unduly. Which was all very well when you weren’t here. Now that you are, however, I think it high time he received some visitors. Might you spare him a moment? Yotsuyu has scarce left his side, and I imagine you are curious to see what has become of her as well.

Alphinaud: We will visit him at once. Auric, Alisaie─shall we?

[In Gosetsu’s room, Yotsuyu is spoon-feeding the injured samurai from a bowl.]

Yotsuyu: Open wide, now…

[Gosetsu seems happy to let her feed him until the door opens, revealing the twins and the Warrior of Light. Then he waves Yotsuyu away.]

Gosetsu: Please, Tsuyu. I am not so frail that I cannot feed myself. Ah, I grow weary of the taste of gruel…

Yotsuyu:You don’t like it? Can I fetch you something else?

Gosetsu:Aye. Wine! Or if that is not “wholesome” enough─I don’t know…a sweet persimmon from Namai? I enjoyed them in my youth.

Yotsuyu: A persimmon.

[Tsuyu leaves the room.]

Alisaie: I hope we are not interrupting your meal. We had heard you were confined to bed, and thought you might welcome some visitors.

Gosetsu: Confined to─ A gross exaggeration! A trifle drained from my exertions, perhaps. But with a little rest, I shall be fighting fit again in no time!

[Tsuyu re-enters.]

Yotsuyu: Take off your clothes.

Alisaie: Gosetsu! Is this how you’ve been spending your time!?

Gosetsu: My lady, I assure you, this is not─

Yotsuyu: Off with them. We need to wash you─you stink!

[Tsuyu is giving Gosetsu a sponge bath. She notices all the marks on his broad back.]

Yotsuyu: What are all these scars? There are so many of them…

Gosetsu: A life of battle will leave its mark upon a man…

[Tsuyu grabs her head in sudden pain as a memory of the fall of Doma Castle flashes into her mind.]
flashback yotsuyu shoots gosetsu

Gosetsu: Is something wrong, Tsuyu?

Yotsuyu: It’s nothing. I’m fine.

Gosetsu: Bah, leave me be, woman! I will not be fussed over like some newborn babe!

[Back outside in Hien’s meeting chamber.]

Hien: They make a convincing pair, do they not? On first acquaintance, I would think him a doting grandsire and her a model grandchild.

Alphinaud: Indeed. Had someone told me a year ago that I would live to bear witness to such a scene, I would have declared them mad. That aside, I am relieved to see Gosetsu has lost none of his spirit.

Alisaie: But what a turn of events… I mean, for her to suddenly be watching over him. You couldn’t make it up. Although I suppose Gosetsu is an old man. With the way he charges through life, it can be easy to forget…

Hien: Aye, he has resisted decrepitude with the same defiance he showed the enemies of Doma. But no matter how adamant his will, no man can carry on forever. He has pushed himself beyond the limits of endurance too many times─even if his health returns, the fact remains: he will never again be the warrior he once was. He has given his all for liege and land, and we will ask no more.

Alisaie: And what of his nurse? If Yotsuyu is feigning that─well, she certainly has me fooled.

???: This is no pretense.

[Yugiri walks in]

Alisaie: Yugiri. Out of all of us, I would think you the hardest to convince. So…what makes you so sure?

Yugiri: I have been spying on Yotsuyu from the shadows─waiting for the misstep that would betray her charade for what it was. But her mask has never slipped. Not once. She has remained in character from the first. One evening, I watched her as she sat in her chambers, unguarded and alone… She had taken the dishes from the cupboard, and was pretending to prepare dinner right there on the tatami. A child’s game. Even the wariest shinobi would not go to such lengths. I can but conclude that her mind is truly broken.

Alisaie: …Well, that’s good enough for me─and everyone else, I would hazard.

Hien: Aye, the matter is settled. Yotsuyu will become “Tsuyu,” and begin a new life here in Doma. Before that can happen, however, we will need to present her to the ambassador one last time, to prove that her memory is truly gone. But I would not risk parading her in front of our returning conscripts. Her presence at the exchange would only stir up mutinous thoughts.

Alisaie: Understandably. She as good as fastened the chains around their necks.

Hien: Aye─which is why I mean to conclude this business with Tsuyu first, out of the sight of my countrymen. Will you help me?

Alphinaud: We are at your service. There is no higher purpose than the pursuit of peace.

Hien: My thanks. The Garleans are on their way, and we must prepare to welcome the ambassador. We will meet you at the docks with Tsuyu.

[Down at the docks at the Doman Enclave.]

Alphinaud: Shall we wait here, then? Lord Hien should not be long.

[Hien comes running up.]

Hien: My friends! Have you seen Tsuyu!? She is nowhere to be found!

Alphinaud: What? But the Garleans will be landing in a matter of moments!

Alisaie: If she’s fled… Could it mean her memories have returned?

Hien: I know not. Yugiri is scouring the streets as we speak, but it is possible Tsuyu has left the enclave altogether. Captain─a word. Did you perchance carry a fair-skinned woman across the river?

Enclave Skiff Captain: A fair-skinned woman, my lord? I…I do not rightly know… I think─ Y-Yes! Yes, my lord! Now that you mention it, there was a lady among the passengers whom I do not recall having seen before. Her face was hidden by the brim of her hat, but I remember taking her hand to help her onto the boat. White as new-fallen snow, it was… Was she someone important, my lord? Have I done something wrong?

Hien: Wrong? …No. No, I was merely hoping to catch our guest before she departed. Be at ease, Captain. ‘Twould seem that Tsuyu has crossed the river.Kami help me… No good can come of this.

Quest: Gone Like the Morning Dew

Hien: It seems Tsuyu has gone unrecognized thus far, but kami help us if someone catches a clear view of her face. I must find her before that happens. The responsibility for her disappearance─for all of this─lies with me. But I would ask for your aid nonetheless.

Alphinaud: We are at your service, Lord Hien, now as before. Let us make the crossing and begin our search.

Alisaie: You go on ahead. Someone should let Yugiri know what we’ve learned. I’ll join you on the other side.

Hien: We have no way of knowing where Tsuyu is headed, so we had best divide our forces. I will take Kusakari and its surrounds; Alphinaud, if you would take the road to Castrum Fluminis? Auric─forgive me, but could I ask you to interrogate the residents of Yuzuka Manor? One of the Namazu may well have seen our quarry. If everyone is in agreement, let us board the skiff, and hope the kami smile upon our efforts!

[At Yuzuka Manor, with the Namazu]

Gyosan: Welcome to Yuzuka Manor. Yes, yes. If there is anything you care to know, you need only─ Hm? A pale-skinned woman? I have seen no such traveler, I am sorry to say. Most sorry. Scaly-skinned Namazu, on the other hand, we have in abundance!

Gyoku: …Unusually pale skin? Yes, yes! I saw this woman on the way back from my fishing trip. She had just crossed the shallows east of here, and was headed in a northeasterly direction…for the most part. Her steps did not seem certain. If you hurry, you might still catch her.

[After tracking Yotsuyu north and east through Yanxia, the Warrior of Light finds her hat on the road just south-east of Namai.]

[Hien and Yugiri walk up.]

Hien: Auric! Before you ask, our search of Kusakari and its surroundings has yielded exactly naught─save this chance reunion with you, I suppose.

Yugiri: Mistress Alisaie has gone to assist her brother at the castrum. It was she who informed me of the situation. I joined Lord Hien here shortly thereafter.

Hien: How did you fare at Yuzuka Manor? Any sign of our missing guest?

[The Warrior of Light explains the tracks he found, heading toward the village.]

Hien:…Towards Namai? By the kami! If the villagers recognize her, it will not end well. We must hurry. Yugiri and I will check the paddies; the village square is yours!

[In Namai, Yotsuyu walks into the village, her face in full view.  The villages recognize her instantly and scatter in panic.]

Yotsuyu: Greetings. Might I have one of y─ Wait! Please! …I only wanted a persimmon.

[Yotsuyu is bewildered.]

Frightened Villager: Kami save us! Her spirit has returned!

[The terrified villagers begin to gather into a mob.]

Panicked Villager: She’s back from the dead to seek her revenge!

[Tsuyu stares at the villagers in confusion. The warrior of Light, Hien, and Yugiri arrive in the town square.]

Isse: It can’t be! She couldn’t have survived!

[Tsuyu sees Isse and has a memory flash of the boy groveling on the ground before her.]

Yotsuyu: What did I… Wh-What did I do?

Isse: As if you don’t know!

[Hien runs up to the gathering mob.]

Hien: Good people of Namai─be at ease, I pray you! You have naught to fear!

[The villagers stare at him in consternation.]

Isse: My lord, forgive me but─what is that monster doing here!? They told us she was dead!

Hien: I too was surprised to learn of her survival. More even than you, I would hazard. ‘Twas I who cut her down. I who left her to her fate. But it would seem the kami had other plans. By some miracle, both she and Gosetsu were spared when the keep collapsed─though Yotsuyu’s preservation came at the cost of her memory.

Isse: You’re saying she’s forgotten? Forgotten everything she’s done!?

Panicked Villager: Lies! Lies, my lord! She would say anything to escape punishment!

Frightened Villager: What does it matter!? We have not forgotten her crimes! And we demand justice! I beg of you, Lord Hien, draw your blade and rid us of this canker!

[Yotsuyu crumples to the ground, her eyes filling with tears.]

Yotsuyu: What I saw, then. It’s all true. I’m sorry! I’m so, so sorry…

Isse: You’re “sorry”!? And what, we’re supposed to forgive you?

[Isse’s little sister Azami walks over to Yotsuyu.]

Azami: Here, there’s no need to cry.

[Azami hands Yotsuyu a ripe persimmon. Yotsuyu takes it, staring at the girl.]

Azami: Can’t you see how scared she is? How can you be scared of her? She’s not the same.

Hien: Until such time as her memories return, this woman shall be known as “Tsuyu,” and treated as a citizen of Doma. I will, however, see that she is watched at all times. Rest assured that there will be no more unannounced visits to the village. As your lord, I ask that you leave her fate in my hands, and suffer her to live. For now.

Azami: Please, Isse…

Isse: All right. I’ll keep my peace. As long as you’re happy. That’s all that matters.

Quest: Fruits of her Labor

Hien: <sigh> That…would have been better avoided. But at least it did not end in bloodshed. And judging by Tsuyu’s reaction, she remains oblivious to the events of her former life. This was no escape attempt.

Yugiri: Nay, it seems it was an offhand request of Gosetsu’s which brought her to Namai. She came in search of a persimmon.

Hien: Hah! And they say fruit is good for the health… I do hope Gosetsu finds the taste to his liking. Well, we have certainly taken the long way around, but let us continue on to Castrum Fluminis and our meeting with the ambassador. Alphinaud and Alisaie should still be there, conducting their search.

[At Castrum Fluminis. Hien, Yotsuyu, Yugiri, and the twins are all there. The group enters the Castrum and finds Asahi and his two guards waiting.]
castrum fluminis.jpg

Hien: It seems our imperial guests have already arrived. ‘Tis time to meet with the ambassador…

Asahi: What a pleasure it is to see you once more, Lord Hien. Not to mention my dear sister.

Hien: A pleasure to see you too, Ambassador. Forgive us our late arrival. You have our people aboard the airship?

Asahi: Exactly as agreed. We would leave you in no doubt as to the purity of our intentions. I daresay it was the selfsame spirit of cooperation which prompted you to bring Yotsuyu here today.

Hien: Indeed. Before excluding her from the exchange, I thought it only fair that you see her condition for yourself. Physically, she is in fine health, but her mind is unchanged.

Asahi: So I see. But all need not necessarily be lost. In anticipation of this tragic turn of events, I took the liberty of inviting some special guests…

[Asahi raises a hand, and his guard speaks into a linkpeal. A moment later an older couple leaves the shuttle and comes to join the group. It’s Asahi’s parents — Yotsuyu’s step-parents.]

Asahi’s Father: Ah, Yotsuyu! You look…well.

[Yotsuyu fliches, then collapses to the ground as she flashes on her cruel treatment at the hands of Asahi’s mother.]

Hien: Of all the people…

Asahi: Is something wrong, dear sister? These are our beloved parents. Does not the sight of them bring back sweet childhood memories?

[Yotsuyu cries out at another bad memory of abuse. She drops Gosetsu’s persimmon and the silver mirror Asahi gave her on his last visit. She stares at the fallen fruit.]

Yotsuyu: …Gosetsu. I have to take this to Gosetsu…

Asahi: Hmph. It would seem my little surprise was not sufficient. You needn’t glare at me so, Lord Hien─I merely did what any loving son would do for his family. Lest you doubt, I am content to leave the acting viceroy in your care. Pray treat her as you would any daughter of Doma.

[Asahi picks up the silver mirror and bends down to whisper in Yotsuyu’s ear as he does so.]

Asahi: Do not grow too fond of this place, dear sister. You will come back to us ere long.

[Yotsuyu walks away as if in a trance.]

Hien: We continue with the exchange as planned, then.

Asahi: Very good. The structure across the river should serve our needs. We shall await you there with the conscripts if you would bring your captives…?

Hien: Agreed. Until then, Ambassador.

[The two groups part ways. Just outside the gate of Castrum Fluminis, Hien stops.]

Hien: I knew better than to trust Asahi, but that was a dirty trick. Still, unpleasant as it was, we have at least put the matter of Tsuyu’s future to rest. I have sent her back to the enclave with Yugiri to give Gosetsu his precious persimmon. Come, let us follow them.

[Hien stalks off.]

Alisaie: You have that look, Alphinaud. What is it?

Alphinaud: Oh, nothing of consequence, most like…We can discuss it upon our return.

[Back in the Kienkan, with the twins and Hien in Hien’s meeting room.]

Hien: We should pay a visit to Gosetsu, and reassure him about Tsuyu’s fate. He will want to know that the Empire has finally relinquished its claim on her.

[At Gosetsu’s room]

Hien: Gosetsu, are you awake?

Gosetsu: My lord! Come in, come in… When Tsuyu returned, her eyes were red from weeping. She spoke not a word─simply sat and peeled some fruit she’d brought for me. She then claimed weariness and retired to her chamber. Tell me, what happened to upset her so?

Hien: The ambassador arranged a surprise reunion with her foster parents. A misguided attempt to restore Yotsuyu to her senses. It was plain their presence caused her great distress, but she seemed otherwise unaffected.

Alisaie: Yotsuyu was mistreated as a child, was she not? It was a cruel trick to use her tormentors like that, knowing the pain it could cause.

Gosetsu: Hmph. I like this Asahi less and less…

Hien: Be that as it may, he has agreed to allow Yotsuyu to remain with us in Doma. Our primary concern now is to hand over the prisoners without incident, and bring our people safely home.

Alphinaud: There was one other detail at the meeting which caught my attention. I assume you all noticed the rather suspect crates within the castrum? The imperials were quick to retrieve them afterwards, but I wonder…

Alisaie: Out with it, Brother. You fear they might contain bombs or war machines?

Hien: If the ambassador wanted me dead, he has had ample opportunity. No, assassination is not his intent, but we should be on our guard for other acts of treachery.

[The door to Gosetsu’s room slides open and an upset maidservant enters.]

Maidservant: My lord! Forgive me, but the lady Yotsuyu─she’s gone!

Gosetsu: Gone!?

Maidservant: I beg your pardons, my lords. I was certain she had fallen asleep…

Hien: No, no, the responsibility is mine. ‘Twas I who gave her a room instead of a cell. She may simply have wandered outside. We will organize search parties. Might I call upon your assistance?

[The group splits up to search for Yotsuyu. The Warrior of Light heads off into the courtyard, and hears a groan.]

???: Help… Help…

[It’s Yotsuyu’s step-father and step-mother, on the ground, bleeding.]

Asahi’s Father: Help… Help me…

[The Warrior of Light reaches down to help, and an Echo flashback hits.]

[Yotsuyu runs through the courtyard in the dim moonlight.]

Yotsuyu: If only I hadn’t remembered.

[Her voice is that of the old cruel Yotsuyu, not of the innocent childlike Tsuyu.]

[Yotsuyu reaches into her sleeve and draws out a wooden scabbard. Inside is a short but very sharp knife. Yotsuyu stares at it.]

Yotsuyu: He should hate me.

[She places the edge of the blade against the side of her throat. Her eyes are brimming with teears.]

Yotsuyu: But I will not suffer his kindness. Not after what I did to him.

Asahi’s Father: Who’s there!?

[Yotsuyu turns toward the voice, lowering the knife away from her throat.]

Asahi’s Mother: <gasp> …Oh, it’s you. What are you doing out here in the dark?

Asahi’s Father: This is the enclave, is it? When the soldiers dragged us back to Doma, you were the last person I expected to see.

Asahi’s Mother: You’re the bane of our existence, Yotsuyu! A font of misery! You couldn’t even do us the simple courtesy of dying, could you! Oh no, you had to live and taint us with the shame of your failure! We had a perfect life in the capital! And now they’re making us wallow in this muddy ruin like common swine! I don’t deserve this!

Asahi’s Father: Now, now, dear, that’ll do. There seems little point in berating the girl when she scarcely remembers her own name. Our time would be better spent contemplating how we’re to survive this unhappy predicament.

[He looks Yotsuyu over with a slimy smile.]

Asahi’s Father: You’ve kept your looks at least. I suspect you’d fetch a handsome price with the right buyer. Maybe enough to get us to Kugane and start a new business…

[Yotsuyu stares at them for a moment, holding the knife behind her back.]
the hidden knife

[Then she laughs, the old mad laugh of Yotsuyu the Imperial Viceroy.]

Yotsuyu: Ah, my beloved parents. No sooner do I wake from gentle slumber than the world returns in all its cruelty. Yes, this is how it always was. How it was meant to be. Very well. If I cannot escape my nature, then I shall embrace it. To the very depths I have sunk, my soul steeped in spite and rotten to the core. The self-righteous hide behind “justice,” but I need no such mask. Father. Mother. Was it not you who made me into this monster? Who taught me the truth of this miserable world? For years I knew naught but the taste of pain and humiliation, but the time has come to savor my vengeance against Doma. Against all my enemies. And it begins…with you!

Asahi’s Father: Yotsuyu…? What…?

[Yotsuyu skewers her step-father, splashing her face with his blood. Her step-mother turns to flee, and Yotsuyu buries the knife in the woman’s back.]

[Yotsuyu hears soft applause coming from nearby as Asahi steps from the shadows, smiling.]

Asahi: Well done, dear sister. Did I not say you would come back to us?

[Yotsuyu stares at him, knife in her hand, blood on her face.]

Yotsuyu: Brother dearest. What a surprise. You always were a cold-blooded little worm. I doubt you thought twice about sending our parents to their deaths.

[Asahi smiles like a hungry hyena.]

Asahi: Your dagger yet drips with their blood and you presume to judge me? To be frank, I didn’t think you had the strength to slay them so cleanly. A single thrust each… I’m impressed! But surely you can’t be satisfied with murdering a pair of doddering elders. You yearn for a deeper vengeance…and the power to see it through.

[He holds out a hand with the silver mirror in it.]

[The Echo Flashback ends. The Warrior of Light is back with Yotsuyu’s dying step-parents.]

Asahi’s Father: Please… I don’t want to die…

[The man collapses as Hien comes running up.]

Hien: Any sign of her?

[Hien sees the bodies.]

Hien: …What happened here?

[The Warrior of Light explains.]

Hien: I knew what would happen if she recovered, and still I did nothing. …You say she left with her brother? Whatever he wants with her, he was willing to pay for it with his parents’ lives… But this is neither the time nor the place. We must gather the others.

[Back in the Kienkan with Yugiri and the twins.]

Hien: We have recovered the Naeuris’ remains, and will hold the cremation anon. <sigh> Would that they had never again set foot in Doma. I broke the news to Gosetsu myself. He was…quiet. I think it best that he be allowed some time alone with his thoughts.

Quest: Conscripts and Contingencies

Hien: So, my friends…that which we feared has come to pass. Yotsuyu has regained her memory and returned to the imperial fold. It is, by any measure, a cruel twist, not least for Gosetsu…but one which does not invalidate our agreement. According to the terms of the contract, we were bound to surrender Yotsuyu into the Garleans’ hands should her condition improve prior to the hour of the exchange. By that reckoning, all is…if not as it should be, then…as it must be. This I can accept. But what I cannot accept are the unconscionable lengths to which Asahi went to achieve this outcome. Given his recent conduct, and his apparent admiration for Zenos, it is plain he cannot be trusted. And that is to say nothing of the unexplained containers he insists on bringing to our meetings. Whatever the ambassador is planning, I think it unlikely our negotiations will end peacefully. In the event of hostilities, the safety of the conscripts must be our first concern. As such, I would have an escape route in place before the meeting begins.

Alphinaud: A wise precaution. If the main structure of Castrum Fluminis is to be the stage for the exchange, then I believe a thorough inspection is in order…

Yugiri: The citadel has stood empty ever since the imperial withdrawal─while we took steps to ensure that it could not be defended by an occupying force, it is entirely possible that the ambassador has arranged things there to his advantage. I will slip inside, and make certain we have an unobstructed exit.

Alphinaud: Pray allow me to join you. I have some experience of imperial facilities. And should matters take a turn for the worse, I would hope to be of at least some use…

Hien: Very good. That should be enough to guarantee us a way out of the castrum. Beyond that, however…  We will need a ship to ferry the conscripts back to the enclave. Even with every skiff we have, it would take several trips to evacuate everyone. …A Confederate sekibune, on the other hand, would require only a single run, and leave us far less vulnerable on the water. Assuming, of course, Rasho can be convinced to part with one.

Alisaie: Might I take the lead on this? I’ve had dealings with Rasho and his pirates before. And I won’t be alone, will I, Auric?

[“You can count on me!”][Alternate answer: “I suppose not”]

Alisaie: Much appreciated. I quite fancy parleying with pirates again. It’s just a shame Lyse won’t be there to reprise her role.

Hien: Hm! I am certain you would make a persuasive pair─but I think I will accompany you to these negotiations all the same.

Yugiri: My lord, the ruler of Doma should not be seen consorting with common brigands…

Hien: Come now, Yugiri─they stood with us against the Empire. If we would ask their aid once more, we must treat with them as equals. My presence shall serve to demonstrate our sincerity.

Yugiri: …Indeed, my lord. Pray forgive my presumption. By your leave, Master Alphinaud and I shall be about our task.

Hien: And we should be on our way to Onokoro. Time is short, and Rasho may take some convincing.

[At Onokoro]

Rasho: Now there is a face I did not expect to see. What brings the noble lord of Doma into the company of bilge rats such as we?

Tansui: If you’ve come to offer Doman chains in place of Garlean ones, then I’m afraid you’ve wasted a trip.

Hien: Ahahaha! And what fine subjects you would make! With your fleet at our disposal, our restoration efforts would be hastened tenfold. But let us speak seriously. I stand before you not to demand your fealty, but to request your aid once more.

Rasho: Mayhap you are confused. Doma’s liberation was but a means to an end. We aided you only to save ourselves. Now we have no such incentive. We have sworn no oath to you, and will not come running like hounds at their master’s whistle.

Hien: And I would not presume to treat you thus. I come to petition your cooperation as an ally of equal standing.

Tansui: Equal standing, you say? Seems a bit lopsided to me. Where’s the profit for us in all of this?

Alisaie: Profit! Must you always think in such shortsighted terms? Have you ever heard of doing the right thing?

Tansui: Have you ever heard of pirates, little miss? You’ll find we’re simple souls: you pay our tithe, you sail in peace; deny us our due and we take it by force. We’ll pull you out of the water if we see you drowning, but we are not in the business of doing something for nothing.

Hien: Calm yourself, Mistress Alisaie. We did not come here to moralize. We came here to talk. And there is more to be said. According to records recovered after the liberation, relatives of your Doman-born brethren were among those conscripted into the imperial army. And as you may be aware, we recently negotiated the return of said conscripts. Many, alas, will arrive to find no families waiting for them, no homes to grant them shelter. I would ask that you offer them a place in the Confederacy. You would not be rescuing strangers, but welcoming brothers and sisters into your ranks. And has not the Confederacy been in need of new recruits…?

Rasho: You seem well-informed of our affairs, Lord Hien.

Tansui: The losses we suffered at the Garleans’ hands are no secret. But since we drove them out of Doma, the Ruby Sea has come alive with traders and travelers. So many vessels to tax, so few pirates to tax them. We could do with some more hands on deck, and doubly so if they’re familiar with the inner workings of the Empire.

Rasho: Very well. The Confederacy agrees to your request. You will have your ship. …But before that, you must do something for me. The vessel I have in mind was damaged during your battle with the Empire. Though we have mended her, she has yet to be declared seaworthy. She is sound enough down below, but when you load her up with conscripts and the waterline rises…those upper planks had best be free of cracks. Assuming you want your people to stay dry, you will do me the favor of swimming around the hull to check for weaknesses. That is, if Doman lords are not averse to getting their robes wet?

Hien: Not this Doman lord! If we each inspect a third of the ship, it shall be done in a trice.

Rasho: That is the spirit. The ship is moored at Quickscape Pier. Our apprentice shipwright will be on deck to hear your report. Look for a lad named Ihanashi.

Alisaie: And I thought I had a knack for parleying with pirates… For the record, my previous attempt was an unmitigated success, and yes, I should have quit while I was ahead.

[Hien and Alisaie walk off toward the ship.]

Tansui: Well, well. I’d thought the rumors exaggerated, but the young lord lives up to his reputation…

[The ship’s hull is checked out. The Warrior of Light finds a small crack in one of the planks. The group reports to Ihanashi.]

Ihanashi: Aye, I’m the shipwright─er, apprentice shipwright. Did you find anything that might need attention?

Alisaie: The section I inspected seemed solid enough.

[The Warrior of Light explains what was found.]

Ihanashi: …On the port side, near the bow, you say? All right, I’ll have a look and see what I can do.

Hien: My apologies, I seem to have lagged behind. I could float in that gentle sea all day…Otherwise, I am happy to report no visible cracking or holes in my section of the hull.

Ihanashi: You─ Y-You─ You’re Lord Hien! The captain sent you to inspect the hull!? Kami have mercy… Forgive us this discourtesy, my lord!

Hien: Hah! ‘Tis quite all right. In fact, I rather enjoyed it. I take it you are of Doma?

Ihanashi: Y-Yes, my lord. The imperials took my father away after the uprising, and I had nowhere else to turn. The Confederacy became my family. But someone told me they’re releasing the conscripts now. Maybe my father will be among them. Not that I can go back─there’s no leaving once you’ve joined…

???: How fares our lady? Is she seaworthy?

[Pirate Captain Rasho walks up.]

Ihanashi: Captain! W-We’ve found a small crack in the port side, but I’ll have it fixed before you know it!

Rasho: I see you have met the boy. Did he tell you his story? He babbles when he is nervous. Should his father be among the conscripts, as he hopes, I mean to give him the choice to leave this life. If he so chooses, I expect you to see they are provided for.

Hien: I have heard that those who join the Confederacy forswear all ties with kin and homeland. Is that oath so easily put aside?

Rasho: If I allow it….I see in him the lad I was twenty-five years ago. You say the words, you mean them, but the yearning for home still lingers. My family is long dead, and I know this life is my lot. But he has scarce dipped his toes with us. If there is a life for him in Doma, he should have the chance to live it.

Hien: Well said. The Empire’s conquest has uprooted many and more. Be it in Yanxia or out on the Ruby Sea, we have a duty to ensure that Ihanashi and others like him are free to dwell where they desire.

Rasho: Then the matter is settled. I will make preparations to cast off.

Hien: Well, my friends, it seems we have our ship. Let us return to the enclave.

[Hien, the twins, Yugiri, and the Warrior of Light rendezvous at the Kienkan.]

Hien: It seems Yugiri and Alphinaud completed their task before us. They have been waiting.

Yugiri: We scouted the structure and determined the swiftest path to safety. In the event of hostilities, we will lead the conscripts outside with all possible haste.

Hien: From there, the Confederacy has pledged a ship to ferry us across the One River. Now we have but to attend the exchange, and pray to the kami these precautions were unnecessary.

Quest: The Primary Agreement

Hien: While we were putting our contingency plans in place, I left Hakuro in charge of organizing transport for the imperial prisoners. He will see they arrive at the appointed hour, leaving us free to rendezvous with our Confederate allies. Come, they await us on the riverbank not far from the castrum.

[On the riverbank. Rasho is waiting with the Confederacy ship.]

Confederate Skipper: Your party is assembled, then?

Hien: Aye, and ready for what lies ahead, I trust. Lest there be any confusion, though… The tower across the water is to be the scene of the exchange─that, and whatever else Asahi has planned. But regardless of the ambassador’s intentions, we will bring our people home. Yugiri─you are to evacuate the conscripts at the first sign of trouble.

Yugiri: Yes, my lord.

Alphinaud: We, meanwhile, shall cover their escape, and lend what support we can.

Rasho: Your ship awaits you at the castrum’s loading docks. She will see you safely home.

Hien: Then all stand ready to play their part. Come! Let us be about it!

[Inside the Castrum. Asahi and his two guards meet up with Hien, Yugiri, and the Warrior of Light.]

Asahi: At last, the hour has come. The conclusion to these negotiations will mark a new beginning for Doma and the Empire─a first step on the road to peaceful coexistence!

Hien: Indeed. We are ready to proceed with the exchange when you are. Forgive my curiosity, Ambassador, but is there a purpose to these containers you bring with you?

Asahi: Oh, the supply crates? They are filled with materials we hoped might be of use in Doma’s restoration. I meant to gift them to you at our last meeting, but we had so much else to discuss…

Hien: How very generous. I confess, I had not expected such compassion, welcome though it is. …But then I was also surprised by the news that one of our captives had delivered herself into your custody ahead of time─a minor discrepancy I shall overlook in the spirit of the occasion.

[Footsteps are heard nearby.]

Yotsuyu: Are you perhaps referring to me, Lord Hien?

[Yotsuyu is back in her Imperial regalia, complete with long pipe in hand.]

Hien: Yotsuyu.

Yotsuyu: Orphan of the Naeuri, widow of Sashihai… …And acting viceroy of Doma! You and your people are mine to govern; mine to punish!

Hien: Well, well. It would seem your shattered mind is mended. As per our agreement with the ambassador, you are free to return with him to the Empire. Your authority as acting viceroy, however, is no longer recognized here.

[Yotsuyu takes a long drag of her pipe and blows out smoke, chuckling.]

Yotsuyu: My position is not for you to decide, little lordling. All who resist the rule of the Empire must be purged. Such was the order given to me by Lord Zenos himself! I will reign here in this putrid, pestilent swamp until the last of you has been broken!

[Yotsuyu reaches into her robes and draws out the silver mirror. She holds it high over her head.]

Yotsuyu: This land shall know no dawn. I will spew forth darkness and drown all in eternal night. And high above you I shall shine uncaring, cold and distant as the moon!

[Asahi triggers a hand-held device, and the crates he brought crack open, revealing a wealth of shining blue aether crystals. The room fills with swirling light.]

Hien: What has she done!?

Alphinaud: Oh, gods… This is a summoning!

[Yotsuyu rises in the air. The moon appears, and then is blacked out by an eclipse. When the light returns, Yotsuyu is transformed into a new Primal — Tsukuyomi.]

[Asahi runs to his guards.]

Asahi: A Doman citizen has called forth an eikon in direct violation of our primary agreement. The negotiations have failed. Abandon the captives, and make preparations to withdraw.

Maxima: But, Ambassador…

Asahi: Disobey me, Pilus, and you disobey the Emperor. Make preparations to withdraw─now.

Maxima: …As you command.

Yugiri: My lord! You must fall back!

Hien: You ask me to run!?

[“A strategic withdrawal!”][Alternate answer: “Leave this to me!]

Hien: Spare my pride, would you? I know this foe is beyond me. The field is yours! We will withdraw…but not without our countrymen. I want every soul accounted for. Every soul!

Yugiri: My lord!

[Hien and Yugiri depart.]

Tsukuyomi: I knew you would not flee. I see now the strength which flows from that baleful light of yours. But I am become Tsukuyomi, goddess of the moon and divinity of night. What power can compare to such celestial majesty!? I shall plunge all I despise into darkness! And within that black abyss, even your light shall flicker and fail. Come, let us cast the stalks and look upon the fate of Doma. I see a future in which the sun sets on this wretched land once and for all!

[Fight!]

[During the fight, shades of Yotsuyu’s past rise up to torment her. When Zenos’ shade appears, the shade of Gosetsu rises to meet it. But his efforts to save Yotsuyu from her demons is in vain.]

[When the fight is over, Yotsuyu falls to the floor, panting with exhaustion. Her hair has turned snow white.]

[As the Warrior of Light watches her warily, a shot rings out and Yotsuyu jerks, then lies still.]

[Asahi comes striding up to the platform, pulls out his pistol, and shoots Yotsuyu a second time.]

Asahi: You really must learn to finish the job. ‘Tis true that a gaudy mirror and a handful of crystals make for a feeble summoning, but even the weakest eikon is a god of sorts. A threat that must be put down.

[The Warrior of light glares at Asahi.]

Asahi: My, my, such hostility! These beings are the sworn enemies of the Empire─I merely did my duty as an imperial officer. Will you surrender to anger, then? Slay an anointed emissary to avenge a fallen foe? You cannot, of course. To do so would burn the bridges we have labored so hard to build! Ah, but I’m forgetting: they’re already ash! This Doman woman has seen to that! The Empire cannot ally itself with any nation that refuses to renounce summoning. I believe I was most clear on that point!

[Asahi laughs maniacally.]

Asahi: It should have been mine. The power he bestowed upon her… I should have been the one to govern Doma! I would have repaid his faith! Instead, this harlot betrayed his trust!

[Asahi kicks Yotsuyu’s unmoving body.]

Asahi: Useless…piece of…filth!

[He kicks her again. And again.]

Asahi: Worthless whore!

[There is the sudden sound of a double impact. Asahi gasps.]

[Yotsuyu’s eyes open.]

Yotsuyu: Thank you, dear brother…for this precious gift. Vengeance.

[With the last of her fading power, Yotsuyu has lifted Asahi up and impaled him on her double moon swords.]

Yotsuyu: These people…our people…they ignore the corruption which festers beneath the surface. Cast aside that which is dirty and broken. Speak not of things which would disrupt their dreary little lives. Like you, Asahi…always pretending not to see. You were the first…the first I swore to kill.

[Asahi struggles on the swords for a moment more, then chokes up blood. It falls on Yotsyuy’s open hand.]

Yotsuyu: Ahhh…such bliss. I had thought my hunger insatiable…but now…now I am satisfied. You should feel honored, dear brother. I saved the last of my strength just…for you.

[Yotsuyu clenches her open hand, and the double swords tear through Asahi and drop his dying body to the floor.]

[The Warrior of Light stands over the dying Yotsuyu in silence.]

Yotsuyu: What’s the matter? The witch of Doma will soon be dead.

[“Gosetsu will mourn you.”][Alternate answer: “Tsuyu deserved a kinder fate.”]

Yotsuyu: He will mourn Tsuyu, perhaps… I wonder… Was the fruit as sweet…as he remembered…?

[The primal energy leaves Yotsuyu’s body and dissipates, leaving her hair black as before.]

[Asahi is not….quite…dead.  He coughs.]

Asahi: Lord Zenos…

[ECHO FLASHBACK!]

[Asahi walks into the Imperial infirmary. Zenos, in a hospital gown, arms and neck bandaged, stands staring out a window. ]

[Asahi drops to one knee before his lord.]

Asahi: Lord Zenos! I am at your disposal.

Zenos: Asahi. You were born of Doma, yes?

Asahi: Yes, my lord! I am honored that you would remember me. How may I serve?

Zenos: You are hereby appointed ambassador plenipotentiary, and empowered to speak with the voice of the Emperor. Return to your native land of Doma, and announce your intention to sue for peace.

Asahi: …For peace?

Zenos: Once negotiations are underway, you are to locate the acting viceroy.

Asahi: She lives? That is to say─I will, my lord.

Zenos: When you have found her, you will initiate a ritual to call forth an eikon. I will instruct you in the necessary steps. Yotsuyu’s faith is unreliable. But as a child raised to believe in the kami, she will serve as a vessel for one of the Kojin’s gods. She need only wish it to be so.

[Zenos hands the silver mirror over to Asahi.]

Zenos: The power will seem a gift, but the eikon’s essence will consume her. She will be no more than a husk, a slave to whim and desire.

Asahi: My lord, ever since the day you saw fit to save my miserable life, I have dreamed of repaying your benevolence. Upon my honor, I swear to devote myself wholly to your service. All that you command will be done, no matter the cost. B-But…I fear the subtleties of your plan yet elude me. From the reports I have heard, the champion who aids the Doman resistance would make short work of a single eikon…

Zenos: The eikon is merely a message. The pacifist teachings of the Populares spread through this city like a plague, and I would remind the people of the threat we face. You will be my chosen agent─the hand which tolls the warning bell. The salvation of this world will not be won through the signing of treaties.

Asahi: Your chosen agent!? I will not fail you, my lord!

[The Echo flashback ends.]

[Asahi coughs out one last blood-soaked message.]

Asahi: My… My master… Lord Zenos… He will come…for you.

[Asahi dies.]

[Hien, Yugiri and the twins come running up. Gosetsu is with them. He sees Yotsuyu’s body and kneels beside it.]

Hien: You have prevailed, I see!

Gosetsu: She is gone. Wherefore did the kami spare us only to inflict this pain…?

[Gosetsu sobs over Yotsuyu’s body.]

Hien: Death shall not want for company this day. You spared us a worse disaster, but I fear our fledgling peace with the Empire was beyond saving.

[One of Asahi’s guards calls out.]

Maxima: Lord Hien!

Hien: Maxima, is it not? I assumed you long fled.

Maxima: I entertain thoughts of escape even now. But our negotiations have yet to reach a satisfying conclusion. The ambassador insisted that the summoning spelled an end to our mission here, but it seemed to me there was more to the tale…

[Maxima turns to the Warrior of Light]

Maxima: I have heard tell of this power you wield. And in your vision, you witnessed Lord Zenos giving these orders?

[“Zenos was behind this plot”][Alternate answer: “I saw a vision of Asahi’s past.”]

Maxima: I have heard tell of this power you wield. And in your vision, you witnessed Lord Zenos giving these orders?

Hien: But how can that be? Zenos is dead. He took his own life after the battle in Ala Mhigo. I saw his body with my own eyes!

Maxima: Forgive me, but Lord Zenos is very much alive─he granted our party an audience prior to our departure. That he was gravely wounded is certain, but his recovery appeared to be proceeding apace.

Alphinaud: I am afraid I share Lord Hien’s confusion. The man’s death was confirmed and his remains interred. These are matters of public record.

Maxima: …Hmm. I have no doubt you believe what you say. But what then is the explanation? That an impostor has infiltrated the innermost circle of the imperial court? The idea is inconceivable, absurd…but worthy of investigation nonetheless. Our movement can ill afford to have a highly placed pretender undermining our efforts…

Hien: Your efforts may yet bear fruit. Tell me, what is to become of our prisoner exchange? Though we have already taken custody of our conscripts, we have yet to release your imperial comrades. Do you still intend to collect them?

Maxima: Ah. Yes, as the late ambassador’s second-in-command, it falls to me to speak on the Empire’s behalf. And I am happy to confirm our intent to proceed according to the original agreement.

Hien: Then let us be about it. ‘Twould be a pity to abandon such a promising beginning.

Maxima: Indeed. You have my thanks, Lord Hien. As soon as our people are secure aboard our airship, we shall depart straightways for Garlemald.

Hien: Tread lightly, Pilus. I sense treachery awaits you there.

Alphinaud: Might I accompany you to the capital?

Alisaie: Alphinaud! Have you gone mad!?

Alphinaud: Impostor or no, if Zenos was instructing Asahi on the finer points of ritual summoning, then experience tells us there is an Ascian waiting in the wings. Without our knowledge and expertise, our new friends will be hard-pressed to contend with a foe for whom death is but a minor inconvenience. They need our help.

Maxima: Were you indeed willing to share your knowledge of this enemy, we would not shun your counsel.

Hien: You truly mean to do this? In full knowledge of the danger?

Alphinaud: I have seen the Warrior of Light risk his life on countless occasions. Next to him, I am scarce more than a distraction on the battlefield. But in the meeting room or the audience chamber, there I can make a difference. I can strike bargains, forge ties, and change minds. And where better to do these things than in the home of our old enemy?

[“I believe in you, Alphinaud.”][Alternate answer: “This is your moment.”]

Hien: ‘Tis not for me to stop you─but I would have you consider an alternative arrangement. Rather than braving the Empire as a simple traveler, go forth as an emissary of Doma. Such a position should offer you some measure of protection.

Alisaie: Go, then. You’ve obviously made up your mind. Just try not to do anything reckless, all right?

Alphinaud: I shall be on my best behavior. Farewell, my friends.

[Alphinaud walks off with Maxima.]

Hien: I knew Asahi was planning some manner of treachery, but a summoning…? Thank the kami you were here, my friend. None of us would have escaped Yotsuyu’s vengeance had you not intervened. She was a pawn, aye, but she still had a choice, and she chose to submit to the ambassador’s plan. ‘Tis little wonder Gosetsu departed in silence.

Yugiri: I gather he left the same way he came: alone aboard a rowing boat. As for the conscripts, most made it to the sekibune before the battle began in earnest, but the vessel yet waits on the riverbank for those who did not flee in time.

Hien: Then I suggest we put this doleful place behind us, and make for the enclave together. ‘Twould be a shame to miss the joyous reunion!

[Back in the Doman enclave, the Doman prisoners of the Empire are reunited with their loved ones.]

Hien: How often have I imagined this moment… Thank you for helping it come to pass.

Gosetsu: Ah, there you are.

Alisaie: Gosetsu, your hair!

Yugiri: My friend… What have you done…?

Gosetsu: An old man who cannot raise his blade has no place in the service of a young lord. Thus did I decide to devote my remaining days to pilgrimage. I will walk this land, offering prayers of repose for all the souls who left this life in suffering.

Hien: …All of them?

[“Safe travels, Gosetsu.”][Alternate answer: “Don’t leave us, Gosetsu!”]

Gosetsu: A fulsome farewell makes for an enjoyable journey!

Hien: Scarcely have we said our good-byes to Alphinaud, and you leave us too. Ah, but ’tis well that my companions find their own way forward. I must endeavor to do the same.

Gosetsu: I have faith that you will find the best path for Doma without me, my lord. Pray forgive me this last act of selfishness, and grant me your blessing.

Hien: You have earned it. A thousand times over! Go in peace, my friend. I shall make of Doma a land where children laugh and none need live in fear.

Gosetsu: There is no better way to honor those who went before… And with that I take my leave!

[Gosetsu strides off, his face set with resolve.]

Hien: Ah, Gosetsu… Fair journey to you, my friend. A bittersweet occasion…but there is yet ample cause to be grateful! Pray join us in the Kienkan. I would thank you properly.

[In the Kienkan]

Hien: Our brothers and sisters are returned to us, and the dream of Doma’s restoration is that much closer to being realized. It is a day that will live long in memory, and one that would never have dawned without the courageous actions of the Scions. On behalf of Doma and her people, we give you our deepest thanks. Lest you think me complacent, I assure you, I have not forgotten the dark cloud on the horizon. That Zenos lives is a source of grave concern─mayhap the gravest─yet there is little to be done but wait for Alphinaud to send word. Until then, I plan to devote myself to fulfilling the promise I made to Gosetsu, by building a nation in which none need live in fear. <sigh> I confess, I miss him already. But the thought that he has at last found peace goes some way to softening the blow. I wonder, did you ever stop to ask yourself why he showed Yotsuyu such kindness? I believe the answer lies in past tragedy─specifically, the death of his wife and daughter during the invasion. Though he hid it well, they were never far from his thoughts, and in Yotsuyu’s childlike mien, I believe he saw not a fallen tyrant, but the little girl who was lost to him. After the loss of his family, Gosetsu devoted himself wholly to the service of his country. He suffered any hardship, strove beyond the limits of endurance without hesitation or complaint. Though Tsuyu could never truly replace his daughter, I had hoped that with her at his side, he might live out the remainder of his days in relative contentment…

Yugiri: Would that the kami had been so minded. Even now, I labor to discern any meaning in Yotsuyu’s fate. To deliver her from certain death, with no memory of her sins, only to leave her at the mercy of her stepbrother? Can that truly have been their will?

Hien: That I cannot tell you. The will of the kami is not for us to know. But what I do know is that for a brief moment, a girl known as “Tsuyu” lived among us… …And that she brought with her a whisper of respite for a grieving heart.

Quest: Under the Moonlight

Alisaie: I think it’s time we were going, don’t you? We’ve done all we can here, and we have a lot to report. But before we head back to the Rising Stones, let’s call in at Rhalgr’s Reach. We should be the ones to tell Lyse about Zenos. After everything we went through together, we owe her that.

[At Rhalgr’s Reach]

Lyse: Auric! Alisaie! You’re back!…Hm? No Alphinaud?

Alisaie: It’s good to see you, Lyse. As for my headstrong brother, he’s off on what will almost certainly turn out to be a once-in-a-lifetime trip to Garlemald. It’s a long story, but…we have evidence that Zenos might still be alive.

Lyse: What!? But that’s─ If this is a joke─ Gods, this had better be a joke! Look─I know what I saw, all right? We all saw it. And here you are saying he’s alive and well and living the high life back in Garlemald!?

Alisaie: I know how ludicrous this sounds. I’m still having difficulty believing it myself. But while I might doubt the word of an imperial envoy, I’m inclined to trust Auric’s. He saw the crown prince through the Echo─in a meeting that could only have taken place in the recent past.

[“It was him. It was Zenos.”][Alternate answer: “Zenos is alive.”]

Lyse: No, it must have been─I don’t know─some kind of…really convincing impostor. Zenos is dead. He had a great big hole in his neck! We buried him!

M’naago: Aye, and someone went to the trouble of desecrating the bastard’s grave, remember?

???: Thal’s gilded…halls. Whatever are you talking about?

[Thancred walks up.]

Thancred: Alphinaud had me lending a hand at the Saltery─keeping an eye on the rebuilding work and so on─just until operations were up and running. And now that they are, I thought I might look in on you before wending my weary way back to headquarters. Forgive me if I misheard, but is there some suggestion the late crown prince could have…gotten better? If so, might I suggest a quick look inside his coffin as our first order of business?

Lyse: Eurgh. As much as I hated the man, it doesn’t feel right defiling his grave. But if it will put this rumor to rest, I suppose we have to. And when there are no curious eyes about, if we can manage it.

M’naago: Zenos is buried up at Bloodhowe in the Lochs. His grave was set apart from the others and left unmarked, so as not to upset the locals.

Lyse: Then it shouldn’t be too hard to find. Naago, you’re in charge until I get back!

[At Bloodhowe, in the Lochs. Zenos’ grave (?)]

Lyse: This is it… Gods, he’d better be in there. Someone scrawled all over the stone a while ago, but I had it scrubbed off, and thought no more about it…

Thancred: So no one thought to check if the coffin was still occupied? Well then, we are presented with but one course of action. And we had best be sure we are not observed in the doing of it. Shall we begin?

[The lid of the stone crypt is removed.  The crypt is empty.]

Thancred: Oh dear. We seem to be missing a corpse.

Alisaie: Well it must be somewhere. I only hope it isn’t walking around…

[Unnoticed by the well-meaning grave defilers, a scout in the Griffin gear of the Ala Mhigan Rebellion is watching the scene from a distance. He has blue eyes, Elezen ears, and carries a katana.]

Lyse: If there’s no corpse, then…are we to conclude the rumors are true?

Thancred: Not necessarily. We might still be dealing with a doppelganger of some kind. An agent could have been sent to dispose of the body in a bid to lend credence to the tale of Zenos’s resurrection. More and more, however, I find myself siding with Alphinaud’s theory of Ascian possession. Speaking from experience, I can tell you they have no qualms about taking a living host, let alone a dead one…

Lyse: You’re saying an Ascian is walking around in Zenos’s body?

Thancred: It seems a distinct possibility. Once I have put this grave back the way we found it, I shall pay a visit to the people responsible for interring the crown prince. Before leaping to any conclusions, I want to know for sure if a body was ever buried here…and how certain we are that Zenos was properly dead.

Lyse: If he wasn’t, that was some trick. He as good as cut his own head off. Anyway, Raubahn needs to hear about this. If you find anything out, send word to me at Rhalgr’s Reach.

Alisaie: <sigh> I don’t know why I’m surprised─with matters settling down in Doma, we were due another crisis. Shall we make for the Rising Stones, then? It’s past time we shared these developments with the others.

[Back in the Rising Stones]

Alisaie: While I was waiting for you to arrive, I spoke with Urianger over linkpearl and gave him a full report. Y’shtola is on her way, and should be here any─ Ah.

Y’shtola: Alisaie. Auric. ‘Tis good to see you safe and well. What news have you from the East?

[Y’shtola is brought up to speed.]

Y’shtola: …Disturbing developments indeed. Given all that we know, I too would conclude that an Ascian now inhabits Zenos’s body. A doppelganger might fool the crown prince’s subordinates, but Auric? Nay, Alphinaud had the right of it. Would that his wisdom extended to the question of his own safety. Capable though he has become, he ventures alone into the enemy’s stronghold─and the shadowy web of the Paragons, like as not.

Alisaie: When it comes to making rash decisions, I’m hardly in a position to criticize, but… I’m worried. I just wish there were something I could do for him besides pray.

Meanwhile, in the Imperial Palace

[In the throne room of the Garlemald Empire.  Emperor Varis zos Galvus confers with his son (?)]

Varis zos Galvus: We cannot suffer eikons to exist. Was I not clear on this point?

Zenos (?): More than clear. The eikon in question was summarily dispatched by the Warrior of Light. The summoner is dead, and the rite beyond repeating. Everything proceeded according to plan─every party behaving exactly as required. My methods may seem extreme, but there is no cause for concern. I work only to ensure the salvation of this star.

[Amid the ruins of an Imperial base in Ala Mhigo. A Resistance soldier is bending over a piece of broken magitek. A second Resistance soldier, a  maleRoegadyn, spots him.]

Roegadyn Soldier: Hm? What are you doing fiddling with that thing?

[There is no reply.]

Roegadyn Soldier: I asked you a question, soldier!

[The Elezen soldier stands up and draws his katana. It’s the same soldier that was spying on the Scions at Zenos’ empty grave.]

Roegadyn Soldier: What are you─ Have you lost your mind!?

[The blue-eyed Elezen soldier cuts down the Roegadyn.]

Roegadyn Soldier: Aaah!

Katana-wielding Soldier: …I have lost many things, but my mind is yet my own. There upon the stage I stood, prepared to take my final bow, only to find that the finale was but an intermission… Shall I use this chance to repent for my sins? Embrace goodness and mediocrity? Nay, I think not. While the one I yearn to face yet lives, the hunt must go on.

[The blue-eyed Elezen soldier flies off in a repaired magitek scoutship.]

Quest: Emissary of the Dawn

[Back in the Rising Stones]

Alisaie: It’s been an eventful few days, hasn’t it. But I suppose all we can do now is wait for word from Alphinaud. Hmph. I don’t recall the last time I had nothing pressing to be getting on with… We should probably make the most of it. Shall I put on some tea?

Y’shtola: Tea would be lovely. You may regale me with the tale of your adventures in the Far East─and of your encounter with this new primal especially.

Alisaie: I’ll put the kettle on, then. That table looks free if you’d like to take a seat.

[Tea with Alisaie and Y’shtola.]

Y’shtola: …Interesting. So this Tsukuyomi was summoned in much the same manner as Susano─via the medium of a sacred relic.

Alisaie: That’s right. They believe their gods─or kami─reside in physical objects.

Y’shtola: Given the danger they represent, it may behoove us to begin a catalog of such relics. But if we are to contain the threat, we will require a better understanding of the summoning method itself. I believe I shall pay a visit to Doma, and learn what I can on the subject.

Alisaie: A fine idea. And I know for a fact that our friends in Doma would be grateful for any information which could help to prevent further summoning in the region. I will pen you a letter of introduction─Lord Hien will wish to welcome our resident expert on aetherology.

[Thancred walks up.]

Thancred: Greetings! Could it be that I’m in time for tea?

Alisaie: It certainly looks that way. Come on─sit down and tell us how your investigations went.

Thancred: After you left, I went about questioning Bloodhowe’s gravekeepers. They all told much the same story: once Lyse and her officers had confirmed Zenos dead, his corpse was interred under strict supervision. There seems little reason to doubt their testimony on that point, but when I mentioned the defacement of Zenos’s grave, accounts grew rather more vague. None reported having seen any suspicious persons in the vicinity, and all assumed the act to have been perpetrated by a vengeful Ala Mhigan. Crucially, however, I was able to confirm that when the offending scrawl was removed, as per Lyse’s instruction, no one involved thought to check the contents of the coffin. By that stage, ’tis like that the corpse was already missing. Assuming Zenos has not, in fact, risen from the dead, we are left with two possibilities: either the body was disposed of to lend credence to the claims of an extremely committed impostor, or an Ascian has taken up residence within it.

Y’shtola: If Asahi was as fervent a devotee as you believe, he would not have been fooled by an impersonation, however committed. We must assume that we are dealing with an Ascian, and proceed accordingly.

Thancred: Agreed. The question is, how many more such monsters are waiting for Alphinaud in Garlemald?

Alisaie: Their presence was his chief reason for going. He understood the risks. I only hope he did not underestimate the extent of the infestation…

[Meanwhile on the Imperial Hypersonic Assault Craft L-XXV with Maxima and Alphinaud]

Maxima: Master Alphinaud, we are making good speed towards our destination. Is aught amiss?

Alphinaud: Nay, ’tis just…I can see naught from my cabin, and was curious to know the land over which we flew.

Maxima: Ah. I am afraid our military craft are built with little thought for such niceties. I am happy to indulge your curiosity, however. We are presently passing over the Burn on the western edge of Othard. Even with the benefit of a porthole, your gaze would have been greeted with naught but malms upon malms of lifeless earth.

Alphinaud: I have read something of the Burn. It was described as a desolate wasteland, bled dry of every last drop of aether…

Maxima: Aye. It is believed that a succession of eikon summonings was responsible.

Maxima: When Emperor Solus first came to Othard and beheld this blight, he is said to have reeled at the scale of the devastation. He declared eikons a threat to our very star’s existence, and issued an Empire-wide decree ordering the eradication of all such entities.

[The ship shudders from a heavy impact.]

Maxima: Hngh! Report!

Imperial Pilot: We’re under attack, sir! Magitek armor─no visible designation.

Alphinaud: Magitek!? But who─? Aaah!

Maxima: All cannons, return fire! Damage report!

Imperial Pilot: The main reactor’s been hit! Helm unresponsive! We’re going down, sir!

Maxima: Damn it! They knew exactly where to hit us.All hands─brace for impact!

[The bridge of the ship goes up in flames and the vessel falls from the sky. Alphinaud blacks out.]

[Alphinaud regains consciousness in a smoke-filled wrecked bridge.]

Maxima: Glad to have you back, Master Alphinaud. We have landed in one piece─more or less. But the air filtration system is damaged, and the ship is filling with smoke. We must gather the survivors and get out while we still can.

Alphinaud: Aye… Aye.

[SOLO DUTY…AS ALPHINAUD!]

Maxima the Neoteric: Master Alphinaud, might I ask you to search for survivors? I will see to our injured helmsmen.

[Alpinaud searches through the barren white sand of the Burn. He clears a piece of wreckage, finds a fallen Imperial, and heals and revives the man.  ]

Wounded Popularis: My thanks…I don’t think I would have made it…

Maxima the Neoteric: Yes, you very likely saved his life.The question of who would try to take it remains, however…

[A group of four hostile Imperial soldiers appears over the dunes and instantly attacks.]

Hostile Commander: Put these last few out of their misery. The prince wishes none left alive!

Maxima the Neoteric: The prince…!?

Alphinaud: They’ve not come to parley, I fear…Ready your weapons!

[The first troop has been felled, but more of them appear over the dunes, with armed air support. Alphinaud and Maxima dive for cover as the flyers open fire.]

Alphinaud: Confound it! Not here. Not like this!

[Suddenly one of the Imperial flyers is shot out of the air.  The shooter appears on top of a dune with two companions. He is a brown-skinned Garlean man wielding a long gunblade.

His companions are a female Garlean lancer with blue hair and a red-headed male Elezen mage with a tattooed face.]

Maxima: Wha─? Who in the Emperor’s name─?

Alphinaud: Enemies of our enemies. Introductions can wait!

Maxima: You are calm in a crisis, Master Alphinaud. Let us finish this, then!

[The Imperials are not pleased by how much ass the shooter is kicking.]

Hostile Stranger: By the emperor, that man is a fiend! Cross formation! Deploy restraints!

[The flying Imperial units surround the man with the gunblade — the Menacing Mercenary — and immobilize him.]

Menacing Mercenary: Bah! A child’s trick!

[Alphinaud and the others cut him free.]

Menacing Mercenary: My thanks, boy!

[The remainder of the hostile Imperial group is defeated.]

Alphinaud: My thanks. Your intervention proved most timely.

Menacing Mercenary: Well, well…I did not think to meet an Eorzean in this place, let alone a Scion.

Alphinaud: You know of me, sir?

Menacing Mercenary: I have some small…history with your order. But I would speak of the present. Know you your assailants? And the severity of your predicament?

Maxima: The soldiers bore the insignia of the Emperor’s personal guard…

Alphinaud: And I could venture a guess as to their motive. But you yet have us at a disadvantage, sir─will you not tell us who you are?

Menacing Mercenary: Our names are not yours for the asking. And as for our purpose…let this be your answer.

[The mercenary with the gunblade tosses a piece of black cloth onto the white sand.]

Alphinaud: An Ascian mask!

Menacing Mercenary: The face of our prey. We must away before more arrive. Come with us or stay, but make your choice now.

Maxima: Even should we manage the long trek out of the Burn and secure passage to the capital, we would no doubt be greeted by the Emperor’s guard…

Alphinaud: Indeed.We accept your gracious offer, uh…

Shadowhunter: “Shadowhunter” will suffice for the present. Come.

[Shadowhunter leads the way across the sand. At his belt hang more  masks — some black, some red, and one white one that looks oddly familiar.]

[Back at the tea party at the Rising Stones]

Alisaie: Ugh, this is intolerable. But as much as I wish it were otherwise, there is nothing we can do for Alphinaud now but pray for his success.

Thancred: Well…that is not entirely true. While your brother journeys to Garlemald from the east, I could make my way there from Ala Mhigo and find out what there is to be learned in the Empire’s western provinces.

Alisaie: Then I’m coming with you! I can’t very well sit here sipping tea if there’s action to be taken!

Thancred: Forgive me, Alisaie, but the provinces are hostile territory, and stealth is all important. It is safer that I go alone.

Alisaie: I can sneak well enough when the situation demands it! Don’t patronize me!

[“We should leave this to Thancred.”][Alternate answer: “I’ll go with him.”]

Alisaie: Not you too.

Y’shtola: I understand your frustration, Alisaie, but Auric has the right of it. We must defer to Thancred’s expertise in this matter.

Alisaie: It seems that praying is to be the extent of my contribution after all. …But I will stay behind, as I have been bid.

Thancred: We all have our talents. Mine just happen to involve a silver tongue and soft soles. I promise to send word the moment I learn aught of consequence.

Y’shtola: See that you notify me too. I mean to depart for Doma as soon as I find a suitable East Aldenard vessel to bear me thither, but I shall return if I am needed.

Alisaie: Be sure to drop in whenever you’re next in the area, Auric. With any luck, I’ll have a painfully detailed report from Alphinaud to share.

Quest: Sisterly Act

[At the Rising Stones]

Alisaie: Oh, Auric. If you’ve come here hoping for news, I’m afraid there isn’t any.  Everything is exactly as it was. Y’shtola is still investigating primals in the Far East, Thancred is still gathering intelligence in the imperial provinces, and Alphinaud is still…out there somewhere.  There’s been no word since his first scheduled report, nor does he respond to calls. And all the while, I’m just meant to sit around here waiting. It’s driving me mad!

Alliance Herald: Begging your pardons! I bear a message from the Eorzean Alliance!

Alisaie: Thank the gods for that. We have a visitor. Welcome to the Rising Stones. If you have a message, I should be most eager to hear it.

Alliance Herald: My lady! The Alliance leadership will soon convene to discuss the matter of Ascian interference, and they humbly request the presence of the Scions of the Seventh Dawn. Having assessed intelligence provided by the Ala Mhigan Resistance concerning the whereabouts of Lord Zenos’s remains, they too suspect Ascian involvement, and wish to deliberate a suitable course of action. As the foremost authorities on our foe, your order’s counsel would be most welcome.

Alisaie: Of course, we should be glad to assist in whatever way we can.

Alisaie: With almost everyone else afield, I’d say this one falls to us. By which I mean, I’m not going on my own. You’ll come with me, I trust?

[“Of course I will.”] [ I’d rather not]

Alisaie: There you have it. We accept the invitation.

Alliance Herald: Thank you! The time and date of the meeting will be shared in due course, but I can confirm that the council will take place in Ala Mhigo. By your leave…

[He departs.]

Alisaie: I somehow doubt we’ll have anything useful to offer, but standing mutely at a meeting would still be better than the nothing I’ve been doing of late. Let’s make ready to depart, shall we?

???: …Thancred!? What’s going on, man?

[Another Scion, Riol, is talking into his linkpearl.]

Riol: …All right! Just be careful on the road back, ye hear!

Alisaie: Did I hear right, Riol? Is Thancred coming back?

Riol: Aye, that he is. Says he’s acquired some important intelligence.  Bein’ in Garlean territory, though, he couldn’t risk sharin’ the particulars in case the imperials were listenin’ in. So he said he’d head back as quick as he could, and to make sure someone was waitin’ for him in the Ala Mhigan Quarter.

Alisaie: Understood! Auric and I will go! We’re bound for Ala Mhigo anyway, and there’s sure to be time before the council begins. Come on, let’s be off.

[In Gyr Abania, the Lochs, Ala Mhigan Quarter. Thancred is there,  drooping in a chair and looking exhausted.]

Thancred: You two are a sight for sore eyes. Now all I need is water for my parched throat. Fetch me a cup, will you? Traipsing through imperial territory is thirsty work…

[Water is fetched. Thancred gulps it down.]

Thancred: Gods, I needed that.

Alisaie: I won’t bother telling you to catch your breath. Whatever brought you galloping back to us, I assume it’s urgent.

Thancred: Quite. Without further ado, then. After the successful uprisings in Doma and Ala Mhigo, rebels in several other provinces were inspired to follow suit. Unfortunately, they did not fare quite so well. The Dalmascans paid the heaviest price. For their defiance, the Emperor made a show of razing their capital to the ground, prompting many of their neighbors to abandon thoughts of resistance. But not all have given up on liberty. Heartened by the news of Doma’s prisoner exchange, some still believe that the Empire may one day be amenable to negotiation. We have the shinobi to thank for spreading the good word. They have worked tirelessly to keep the subjugated informed, and a little knowledge can go a long way.

Alisaie: There is at least a spark of hope, then.

Thancred: A spark in want of kindling, yes. The Alliance has already begun supplying materiel to resistance movements abroad, many of whom would otherwise struggle to continue the fight. The support effort is being led by the sultana and the Elder Seedseer, who have both seen enough Ala Mhigan refugees to know the consequences of oppression. And for their troubles, they have quickly earned a reputation as folk heroes in certain corners of the Empire. That is all for the provinces. As for the Garlean motherland itself… Our friends the Populares have suffered something of a setback, I regret to say. Talk is rife that Doma has summoned a primal, and the Empire’s more liberal voices are being drowned out in the fearful clamor for retribution.

[Alisaie doesn’t like this.]

Alisaie: And who do they think orchestrated this summoning!?

Thancred: Oh, any but those truly responsible. Zenos has seen to that.  Speaking of whom, the crown prince is recovering remarkably well. Well enough, in fact, to enable him to personally tour the provinces, putting the fear of the Emperor into the hearts of any would-be dissidents.

Alisaie: He walks in plain sight? And none suspect him? Then it’s as we feared…

Thancred: Yes. An Ascian wears his skin.  …But it was not that which brought me here in such haste. During my time in the provinces, I learned many things, yet at no point did I hear any report of a Doman emissary in the capital.

Alisaie: But Alphinaud should have arrived by now. Could they be holding him there in secret?

Thancred: The possibility did cross my mind ─ but I have reason to believe he never reached his destination. As you know, Scions assigned to covert operations, such as Riol and myself, are issued special linkpearls for communication in the event of an emergency. I mention this because it was originally Alphinaud’s task to coordinate the response at headquarters ─ meaning he has one. And whose voice should I hear when mine recently crackled to life…?

Alisaie: You spoke with Alphinaud!?

Thancred: Spoke with, no. I but heard his voice ─ and none too clearly at that. Two words were all I could make out. “The Burn.”

Alisaie: The wasteland on the edge of Othard? Something must have happened to them there!  There’s no time to waste! We must make for the Burn at once!

Thancred: I had a feeling you might say that.

Alisaie: And? I can’t very well sit around here drinking tea if Alphinaud is in trouble. You said yourself that this linkpearl was only to be used in emergencies.  So I’m going, and that’s the end of it.

[The Warrior of Light nods. Alisaie will not go alone.]

Thancred: Well, far be it from me to change your minds.

Alisaie: Loath though I am to neglect making preparations for the council, we must act swiftly before Alphinaud’s trail goes cold.  I propose we first pay Hien a visit. He’s sure to want to hear about these developments, and he may well be able to advise us on how best to reach the Burn.

Thancred: A sound plan. And Y’shtola is in Doma, is she not? I daresay she’d join you in the search if you asked her nicely.  While you see to all that, I shall go and report my findings to the Alliance. You may leave any preparations for the council to me.

Alisaie: Thank you, Thancred. Right, to Doma, then. We have much and more to share with Y’shtola.

[In the Doman Enclave. Y’shtola is speaking to a Doman worker.]

Y’shtola: …Hmm. That is curious indeed. While other matters demand my attention at present, I shall bear what you have told me in mind. Should you notice any change, do not hesitate to seek me out.

Doman Miner: Thank you, my lady. You are most kind.

[Y’shtola comes over to meet Alisaie and the Warrior of Light.]

Y’shtola: …Well, well. Two faces from the dim and distant past.

Alisaie: Come now, it hasn’t been that long. Who was that you were speaking with?

Y’shtola: A local miner who supplies crystals for the rebuilding effort. Of late, he claims to have struggled to find a crystal with so much as a trace of elemental energy.  Upon learning that I had some knowledge of aether, he came seeking my counsel. Just now he brought me one of his recent finds.  It was precisely as he described ─ devoid of elemental energy…and eerily reminiscent of the deaspected crystals that manifested in Eorzea in the days prior to the Calamity. We would be wise to investigate this phenomenon more closely.

Alisaie: Indeed… But on a more positive note, the locals seem to have taken a liking to you.

Y’shtola: More an interest in than a liking to, I think. The sight of a Miqo’te with a peculiar contraption upon her head has a certain novelty value in these parts. Any actual regard they may have for me, I owe wholly to you and the others who came before. Everyone here has been exceedingly cooperative, and I am pleased to report that I have all but concluded my investigation.  Simply put, by focusing one’s will upon an aether-infused object of worship, it is possible to conduct a summoning.

Alisaie: …So, the fact that they are objects of worship is the key? They are themselves suffused with the requisite belief?

Y’shtola: Correct. Such sacred relics as the Kojin collect obviate the need for religious fervor in the summoner ─ Yotsuyu being the most obvious example. She had but to associate the artifact given to her by Asahi with the divine, and it served to amplify her desires and give them form. A form nourished through the power of crystals, also provided by her brother. And thus was Tsukuyomi brought into being. Which brings me to the question of preventative measures ─ to which I have yet to find a satisfactory answer. At present, I know of naught that will avail us, save to keep watch over the movement of relics and crystals. As if we did not have enough to keep watch over already… …But I doubt you came all this way to hear that which may be perused in a report. Has something happened to Alphinaud?

[Alisaie explains.]

Y’shtola: …Hm. I shall join you in the search, of course.

Alisaie: Thank you, Y’shtola. I should be glad of your help. Truly.  Now, if there’s nothing else, I shall go on ahead and request an audience with Lord Hien.

[Alisaie leaves.]

Y’shtola: Alisaie puts on a brave face, but she has little talent for concealment. We should join her at the Kienkan.

[At the Kienkan. Hien and Yugiri are there.]

Hien: Greetings, my friend. Alisaie has explained all to me.  Needless to say, you shall have our full cooperation in the search. Even if Alphinaud’s trail does lead to the Burn, of all places…

Quest: Feel the Burn

Hien: The region known as the Burn occupies a special place in Garlean history. Every child in the Empire is familiar with the tale.  In the distant past, it was a verdant land teeming with life, but successive summonings saw it bled dry of aether and reduced to a desert. It was upon beholding the devastation that primals had wrought, that Emperor Solus was spurred to embark upon his crusade against their kind.

Y’shtola: The Burn offers a glimpse of the future we seek to prevent. Know you of any reason why Alphinaud might have gone there?

Hien: Aye. Mischance. Though it lies on the route to Garlemald, it is no place to make a stop. My guess is they encountered some manner of trouble there. In any event, I am of the same mind as Alisaie ─ we have no choice but to take our search to the Burn. Given the considerable distances involved, ’tis best we went by bird. Auric and I have our yols. Yugiri, will you ready falcons for the others?

Yugiri: I shall gather our swiftest birds. Near the House of the Fierce, there is an overlook. Pray join us there once you have seen to your preparations.

[On an outcrop overlooking the Valley of the Fallen Rainbow.]

Hien: If everyone is here and possessed of a bird, let us away.  Remember, our destination is a barren wasteland. There is no civilization to speak of for a hundred malms in all directions. Take care you do not lose your way.

[DUNGEON:  The Burn]

Yugiri: Make ready, friends. We are come to the Burn.

Hien: Everyone! Land where you can! We must wait out the storm!

[The group is separated by the storm and has to fight the creatures of the Burn to reunite.]

Hien: Ah! There you are!  Between contending with bloodthirsty beasts and sand in my…every conceivable place, I had begun to despair of finding you again.

Yugiri: Do you recognize the crashed ship over yonder?  Mistress Alisaie and I briefly inspected it. It is the vessel that bore Master Alphinaud away.

Alisaie: But there was no sign of him. Nor of Maxima and his people.

[Y’shtola surveys the area and spots wreckage from the Imperial attackers who brought Alphinaud’s ship down.]

Y’shtola: Warmachina. It would seem they were involved in a struggle.  There may be clues. We should split up and search the area.

[We find more wreckage, and the bodies of the attacking Imperials.]

Yugiri: Hm. These were no ordinary soldiers.  Over here!

Yugiri: The insignia on this man’s uniform identifies him as one of the Emperor’s personal guard.

Y’shtola: Handpicked soldiers answering only to the royal family…

Hien: That would explain why all the casualties are Garlean. They were fighting their own.

Alisaie: You’re saying the Emperor was behind this? That Alphinaud is his prisoner?

[We don’t know that yet.][“Alphinaud is fine, I’m sure of it.”]

Hien: Aye, we must not jump to conclusions. Besides, Alphinaud is more than capable of looking after himself, is he not?

Yugiri: I suggest we return to Doma to consider our options. Whatever happened here, Master Alphinaud is long gone, and any subsequent search may safely be left in the hands of the shinobi.

[Nods all around. Yugiri whistles for our bird mounts. ]

[Alisaie takes a long look at the wreckage of Alphinaud’s ship.]

Alisaie: Where in the world are you, Brother? If you die on me, I will never let you hear the end of it.

[Back at the Doman Enclave]

Hien: Well, that was a decidedly uneventful journey. I almost found myself hoping for a sandstorm.  Joking aside, I’d say our birds are due a good brush down and a treat or two, wouldn’t you?

Quest: Shadows in the Empire

Hien: I had hoped to steal a moment’s rest after our little outing, but it would seem duty calls. A foreign emissary arrived in my absence.

Y’shtola: Do not let us keep you then.

Hien: Actually…I was wondering if you might join me. I cannot think of a guest who could fail to be impressed by the presence of the Scions ─ at least, none I should be happy to receive.

Alisaie: Of course ─ if you think it will be useful.

Hien: Thank you. Let us return to my manor, then.

[We enter the Kienkan to find Lyse waiting for us.]

Y’shtola: Lyse! What brings you here?

Lyse: Oh, Alliance business. We have a request for Doma ─ well, Hien.  But that can wait. They told me you were out searching for Alphinaud. Did you manage to pick up his trail?

[Lyse is brought up to speed.]

Lyse: Well, if he wasn’t at the crash site, he might still have escaped. We have to keep searching!

Hien: And we will. Alphinaud embarked on this journey as an emissary of Doma, and I hold myself responsible for his safe return. I will have our shinobi in the provinces search for him as a matter of urgency.  Chin up, Alisaie. You’ll get to admonish your brother for his recklessness yet.

[Alisaie looks very anxious.]

Alisaie: Well, someone has to do it.

Lyse: I’m sure he’s going to be fine. There is one thing I’m not sure about, though. You said it was the Emperor’s personal guard that attacked Alphinaud’s airship. But the Populares would never have been able to arrange the prisoner exchange without Varis’s blessing. So why would he sabotage his own mission?

Yugiri: They may not have been acting on Varis’s orders. The guard answer not only to him, but to his family. The crown prince, included.

Hien: When Yotsuyu summoned Tsukuyomi, Asahi was quick to proclaim that a Doman citizen had violated the terms of our agreement. That the negotiations had failed.  And it is this version of events that is now being repeated across Garlemald. To hear the tale, one would think the prisoner exchange never took place. Plainly, someone is manipulating matters from the shadows. Most likely Zenos ─ or whoever it is that wears his face.

Y’shtola: Whichever Ascian, you mean. We all know the nature of our adversary.

Hien: The servants of chaos are true to their name. Their meddling has cost Doma a chance at peace. Whoever it was that loosed his personal guard, the Emperor cannot be ignorant of these developments. We must proceed on the assumption that our treaty is indeed in tatters. But come, Lyse, you have journeyed far. Let me hear your petition.

Lyse: Right, so, the big news is that Ala Mhigo has agreed to join the Eorzean Alliance. To make it official, and discuss where we all go from here, the leaders of the five nations are planning to hold a meeting, and we were hoping you might come too. We’ve already seen what we can achieve when we work together, and the Alliance hopes to work even more closely in future. They think it’s our best hope of keeping the Garleans in check ─ and I agree.

Hien: As do I. By coordinating our efforts in the east and west, we may be able to discourage them from committing their forces to a single front. I accept your invitation. I must, however, ask for time to attend to some pressing matters here. In light of recent events, the risk of imperial reprisals is greater than ever, and I would not leave Doma unguarded. Ere I depart, I must shore up her defenses.

Lyse: Understood. I’ll let the Alliance know.  We’ll wait to hear from you before setting a date. The meeting’s to be held at the royal palace in Ala Mhigo, incidentally. Do you remember the way?

Hien: Well enough. Please assure my hosts that I will not keep them waiting any longer than I have to.

Lyse: Consider it done! And thank you for agreeing to come. If we all put our heads together, we’re sure to find the best way forward. For everyone.

Hien: My advisors and I will presently convene to discuss the matter of Doma’s defenses. You are welcome to stay, of course…

Y’shtola: Had you not offered, I would have requested leave to remain. Where the Ascians are concerned, naught may be left to chance.

Hien: As ever, we would benefit from your experience.  I thank you for coming, Lyse ─ even if it was on official business. I had hoped there might be time to show you the land you helped to save, but I will settle for a fleeting visit if needs must.

Lyse: There never does seem to be enough time for anything, does there… But I did get to see a little of the enclave. You’ve made excellent progress, I must say! And soon you’ll have the chance to see how we’re getting on too. Till the meeting, then!  …Um, Auric? I was wondering if I might have a word with you before I go. In private.

Hien: Go on, my friend. I will send for Hakuro and the others in the meantime.

Lyse: Great. I’ll wait for you at the docks.

[At the docks.]

Lyse: Thanks for coming. Knowing you, you’ve probably guessed what I wanted to talk about. Alisaie. She’s acting as if everything’s all right, but it’s clear she’s barely coping. The Alisaie I know is overbearing, willful, and reckless ─ and that’s fine. It’s how she deals with feeling weak. She has to keep moving, or she’s afraid she’ll fall apart. …A lot like me. But the thing about people like us is that we need someone to keep an eye on us. I had Papalymo, and now I have my friends in the Resistance. And Alisaie has you and the Scions. Before you start, I’m not saying you’re neglecting her. I’m sure you aren’t, and I’m sure you won’t ─ but she’s a good friend, and when I see her like this, I can’t help worrying. So please, make sure you give her all the support she needs, all right?

[“Leave it to me.”][You’ve nothing to worry about. Seriously.]

Lyse: Thank you, Auric. It goes without saying, but if there’s anything I can do, you only need to ask.  Well, I’d best be off. See you in Ala Mhigo!

[Lyse departs.]

[Back in the Kienkan. Y’shtola, Alisaie, Hien, Yugiri, and Hakuro the wolfman are present.]

Hien: Ah, there you are, my friend. Everyone has assembled, so let us begin.

Yugiri: If we are to ready ourselves for invasion, we shall need manpower, provisions, and time. All of which are in notably short supply.

Hien: Candid as ever, Yugiri. And correct, I concede. Fortunately, I have an idea. ‘Tis plain no single nation can stand against the might of the Empire. And it was only with the aid of others that Doma succeeded in winning her freedom. So I mean to take a leaf out of our Eorzean friends’ book and form an alliance of our own. In addition to those with whom we already share an understanding, I would reach out to Hingashi and Sui-no-Sato, and further afield, to the myriad peoples of Nagxia and Dalmasca. I am under no illusion ─ not all will answer the call. Yet disparate though we may be, we are united in our desire for freedom. If our neighbors could be made to see what is at stake ─ Ascian machinations and all ─ cooperation need not be so far-fetched a notion.

Y’shtola: …It may even seem practical.  Under the guidance of our former leader, Master Louisoix, we once strove to unite the fractious city-states of Eorzea. I daresay that experience shall be of use in your endeavor.

Hien: We should be glad of your wisdom.

Alisaie: For the record, I would have been in favor of this plan, even if it hadn’t been my grandfather’s, but I have to ask:  how will we secure the time to carry it out?  Not that anyone has forgotten, but the Garleans have airships. Lots and lots of airships. Should they catch wind of our plan, they could send an armada to overwhelm us before our alliance had even begun to take shape.

Y’shtola: …Not if we deny them access to the skies.  During our time in the Burn, the Warrior of Light and I chanced upon some Allagan ruins.

Alisaie: Oh?

Y’shtola: As such ruins go, they were not particularly unusual, but something about the surrounding land struck me as odd. Faint though it was, its aetherial residue was uncannily similar to that of Azys Lla. Identical, in fact.  For locations so far removed to share a single aetheric signature is all but impossible. I conclude therefore that the Allagans created the floating continent with land taken from the Burn.

Yugiri: While that is a most intriguing theory, I fail to see what relevance it has to Doma’s defense.

Y’shtola: Azys Lla was enclosed in a powerful energy barrier, impenetrable even to an Agrius-class battleship.  It occurred to me that those ruins may have enjoyed similar protection. I have no proof, but the Warrior of Light did report seeing a structure resembling other known Allagan field generators.

Alisaie: All right, but even if we could put up such an energy barrier, it surely wouldn’t extend beyond the limits of the Burn. So what’s to stop the Garleans flying around it?

Hien: …Fuel. The Dalmascan capital, Rabanastre, was a key imperial refueling point in the East. By laying waste to it as a lesson to the rest, the Empire greatly hindered its own operations in the region.  If an imperial fleet were to advance upon Doma, it would now have little choice but to travel as the crow flies ─ over the Burn.

Alisaie: I see!

Y’shtola: A word of caution. Even assuming the generator still functions, raising a barrier of such a scale will require a prodigious amount of energy.  And few places are so bereft of suitable crystals as the Burn.

Hien: Hm… A source of energy.  Tell me, did the Allagans make a habit of launching things into the sky?

Y’shtola: A curious question. Besides Azys Lla, I know of only one other notable instance:  the red moon Dalamud, whose fall triggered the Calamity.

Hien: Just the two occasions, you say… Then I believe I may have a solution to our energy problem.

Alisaie: …You do?

Hien: I may. To find out for sure, we would need to visit the Azim Steppe.  …Which would, I now see, present the perfect opportunity to discuss an alliance with the Xaela tribes. How very neat! What say you, then? Shall we see whither this road leads?

Quest: A Power in Slumber

Hien: It is settled, then. I will journey to the Azim Steppe with the Scions. Yugiri and Hakuro ─ I leave our other neighbors to you.

Alisaie: My apologies, but I won’t be joining you.  I am no aetherologist, and what skills I do possess are unlikely to be of any great use to the mission. But more importantly, it seems to me that the ruins in the Burn warrant attention.  And so, while you are away securing an energy source, I will engage our friends at Garlond Ironworks to undertake a complete overhaul of the field generators. We’ll need them in good working order if our plan is to succeed. I trust there are no objections?

[“Have care in the Burn.”][Come on, Alisaie…Could you not get Tataru to do it?]

Alisaie: Have care on the Steppe! From what I hear, the Xaela like fighting with friends almost as much as foes. Good luck!

Hien: Just the three of us, then. Very well. Shall we make first for Reunion?

[In Reunion on the Azim Stepp with Hien and Y’shtola.]

Y’shtola: So this is the Azim Steppe… The tales do not do it justice.

Hien: If you think the view is impressive here, wait until we reach higher ground.  Actually…seeing as it’s your first visit, permit me to show you my favorite spot.

[On an outlook overlooking the Dawn Throne.]

Hien: Ahhh, I will never tire of this vista! The endless fields, the boundless skies… ‘Tis a sight to make a man forget his cares.

Y’shtola: But not his purpose, I trust.  Might this be a fitting moment to tell us what we are doing here?

Hien: Of course. During my time with the Mol, I learned some few myths of this land. One goes thus… “In the distant past, when all seemed doomed, a wayfaring soul came unto the steppe. Venturing into the northern crag, he received of Nhaama a sliver of her essence ─ a shard of the shining moon ─ and with it clove the tainted land from the earth.  The end thus averted, to these fields did the wayfaring soul return. And venturing once more into the northern crag, he buried the shard, and made unto the heavens an offering of blood.”

Y’shtola: A tainted land cloven from the earth, and an offering of blood to the heavens… Azys Lla and Dalamud.

Hien: That was my thinking, yes.

Y’shtola: And you believe that yonder mountains hide an artifact possessed of sufficient power to raise Azys Lla up to the heavens. …I suppose that might suffice.

Hien: Worth a closer look, would you say?

Y’shtola: I would.

[Back in Reunion]

Hien: From here, we shall travel to Mol Iloh. There we may ask Cirina about the particulars of the myth, and raise the matter of an alliance with the rulers of the Steppe.

[In Mol Iloh.]

Cirina: Hien, Auric. I am glad of your visit, and the opportunity to welcome a new friend. How may we serve you?

Hien: There is a matter I would discuss with the Mol. It concerns not only the peoples of the Steppe, but of every land in the Far East.

[Hien explains.]

Cirina: A shard of the shining moon left behind by a wayfaring soul… And you need this to protect our lands?

Hien: I do. My friends and I wish to find the shard and ascertain the extent of its power. Will you tell me more of the place where it lies buried? This “northern crag”?

Cirina: …If that is your wish. In the mountains to the north, there is a cavern called the House of the Crooked Coin. Inside this cavern are pillars of stone that legend holds to be the source of Nhaama’s power. There, I believe, you will find what you seek.

Hien: Ah, yes, I know the place. ‘Tis a brisk walk from here. And what are your thoughts on an alliance?

Cirina: Should the Empire return, our lands will be engulfed in a storm of conflict whether we will it or no. If we do not stand together, we will fall apart. This I believe with all my heart. However…

Y’shtola: …However?

Cirina: Among the tribes of the Steppe, there are those who revere Nhaama above all else. To them, the pillars are sacred, and not to be disturbed. Should you proceed as you propose, such tribes are like to spurn an alliance, prompting others to follow their example. That is my concern. But it is by no means certain that the pillars will provide the power you seek. Ere you risk the ire of the followers of Nhaama, might you not first visit the House of the Crooked Coin? If all is as you hope, we may then consider how best to earn their blessing.

Hien: I thank you for your counsel. We will do as you suggest. I have no desire to give offense to those with whom I would join hands.

Cirina: Thank you for your understanding. Though the Mol may reign over the Steppe today, this decision will shape the days to come, and we would not force others into war against their will.

Hien: Nor we. A hundredfold stronger are they who choose to fight of their own accord.

Quest: The Will of the Moon

Y’shtola: It seems the time is come to put my skills to use. Pray lead the way to the House of the Crooked Coin.

[At the Crooked Coin in the northeast Azim Steppe. Y’shtola examines the glowing runed pillars with her aether senses.]

Y’shtola: Such an abundance of aether!

Hien: Are we in luck?

Y’shtola: We are. This is an Allagan artifact, most likely built to regulate the flow of aether. I strongly suspect the ancients used it to stem the flow from here to the Burn. That would explain how they were able to untether what became Azys Lla from its surroundings. But were we to throw open the floodgates, the resultant deluge would surely be sufficient to raise our wall. And in restoring the flow, we may also restore life to the wasteland. Hm…?

[Y’shtola stares at the pillars, lost in thought.]

Hien: What is it?

Y’shtola: While the device itself harbors a surfeit of aether, the opposite is true of the surrounding area… An effect of regulation, perhaps? A similar phenomenon seemed to be occurring in Doma… Whatever the explanation, the answer will not reveal itself here. We have seen what we needed to see. Let us return to Mol Iloh.

[Back in Mol Iloh.]

Cirina: You found that which you seek, then? Great indeed is the Dusk Mother’s power. If naught less will suffice to protect our lands, the blessing of the other tribes must now be sought.

Hien: Of course. But to which tribes should we appeal?

Cirina: There are many who worship Nhaama, but none are so fervent in their faith as the Dotharl. Their consent shall be the key.

Y’shtola: The Dotharl. Lyse spoke of them. A warlike tribe possessed of unique customs and beliefs. I sense their cooperation will not be easily won.

Hien: Nay, but it will be well worth the effort. The Dotharl fear nothing ─ death least of all ─ and our alliance would be greatly strengthened by their presence. Let us go to Dotharl Khaa and treat with their khatun, Sadu.

[In the southwest of the Steppe, at Dotharl Khaa.]

Sadu: You again? Other matters demand our time, khagan. Unless it is battle you seek?

Hien: Alas not. Quite the opposite, in fact…

[Hien explains.]

Sadu: Talking, always talking… You say the pillars hold great power? Of course they do. They are the source of Nhaama’s strength.  To the Dotharl, no place is more sacred, and we will make ash of any who would defile it. Though I see this is not your wish.

Hien: You see the wisdom of our proposition, then? You will join hands with us?

Sadu: I said nothing of joining hands. You wish to wield Nhaama’s power to defend these lands, and this I will allow. But for leaving the Steppe to fight the men in iron I would have something in return.

Y’shtola: …Namely?

Sadu: Namely battle. With you, khagan!

[Sadu points to the Warrior of Light.]

Sadu: The Naadam ended ere it began. I would face you again, alone, without distractions.  Defeat me ─ prove yourself the stronger ─ and you shall have the Dotharl as your allies. Surely, these are agreeable terms?

Hien: Well, this is a…not wholly unexpected turn of events ─ though I had assumed I would be the one required to fight. Alas, the khatun has made her choice.

[“Shall we dance?”][I’d rather not.]

Sadu: Ha! It shall be a battle the Steppe shall not soon forget!  Ahhh, already my soul burns brighter! Prepare yourself, khagan, and await me outside the khaa. I will gather my witnesses and join you anon.

[At the battle site in Nhaama’s Retreat.]

Sadu: Yes, this spot shall serve as well as any. I shall enjoy this, khagan!

Y’shtola: Is this truly necessary? Have you no peaceable way of making decisions?

Sadu: Speak not of peace. You stand before proud warriors of the Dotharl. In the heat of battle do our souls burn brightest! We lay low the strong that we may rise higher! That is our way ─ the way of might! There is no other!

Y’shtola: …Well, they do not want for conviction.

Hien: Indeed. It’s what makes them such dangerous enemies…and such useful allies.

Sadu: Enough talk! It is time to fight!

[FIGHT!  …Sadu cheats like CRAZY, with multiple lives and various adds.]

Sadu Heavensflame: Come, khagan! Let us dance! You are strong indeed… A worthy champion of the Steppe… But you are mistaken if you think I will fall so easily!

[MORE FIGHT!]

Sadu Heavensflame: Ahhh, fighting you is pure bliss! Such sweet pleasure, I will not suffer to end so soon! …Well? Do not tell me that is all you have? My soul demands more, khagan! Give me more!

[FIGHTY FIGHT FIGHT!]

Sadu Heavensflame: My arms…grow heavy… My eyes dim… But so long as my lifeblood flows…I will fight on! Yaaaaaarrrgh! Come! Let us begin anew! This is the reckoning, khagan! One must fall!

[In the end, she falls. It doesn’t seem to bother her much though.]

Sadu: Yes! YES! Not since the Naadam has my soul burned so!  Come! We have only just begun!

[Sadu prepares to resume combat — but is interrupted.]

Magnai: Enough. You were not granted leave to set the Steppe ablaze.

[Magnai and several of his followers have appeared at the battle site. Magnai does not look happy.]

Hien: Well, well! The sun has come out to play!

Sadu: Begone, moonstruck Oronir! I am busy.

[Magnai is offended.]

Magnai: Fool of a Dotharl. Have you forgotten the face of your master already? The Sun will never set! From his seat on high, he reigns over all, now and forever!

[Y’shtola and the Warrior of Light roll their eyes at Magnai’s arrogance.]

Magnai: Yet what should He find here but a battle to determine the fate of the Steppe ─ a battle waged without His blessing! This will not stand!  You, Doman. You who come to petition the warriors of this land forget that all Nhaama’s children are wards of the Oronir. As first among my brothers, your petition is mine alone to judge.

[Sadu is unimpressed.]

Sadu: These words are as wind from a horse’s backside. Plentiful. But your axe sings more sweetly. Let her speak for you.

[Magnai unsheathes his blade.]

Magnai: Insolent child. You will learn your place.

[Magnai charges onto the battle site, but Hien dashes in, katana drawn, to intercept him.]

Hien: Forgive me, Brother Magnai, but we have an arrangement with the Dotharl. We will not abide any interruptions.

Magnai: So be it. The Sun will pass judgment on all. Daidukul ─ join me.

Sadu: The Sun is in good company. We may dance alone.

Magnai: Beg not for mercy, for you will have none. Bear witness to the power and the glory of Azim!

Y’shtola: Constantly at each other’s throats, like rabid…dogs. Gods, I’m turning into her.  Ahem. I have not the patience for this. But if we must fight, let us at least be brief. Come!

[FIGHT!! … As Y’shtola!?! Y’shtola and Hien must face Magnai and Daidukul. Magnai cheats nearly as badly as Sadu.]

Magnai the Older: Come! Plead your case unto the Sun!

Hien: Oh, we shall endeavor to be most convincing!

Daidukul the Mirthful: When we have claimed victory, I claim Hien for the Buduga!

Y’shtola: Do as you will…

[Hien takes on Daidukul while Y’shtola heals and keeps Magnai running after her.]

Magnai the Older: You, too, must learn your place.

Hien: Let’s move this right along!

Magnai the Older: You have left yourself open, Doman!

[Hien attempts a big attack but Daidukul counters powerfully, injuring Hien.]

Hien: Ugh, this bodes ill… Y’shtola ─ some healing would be welcome!

Daidukul the Mirthful: My fist swells with the passion of the Buduga! Every last drop, I give to you, Hien!

[Y’shtola heals Hien. Daidukul is defeated and leaves the arena.]

Magnai the Older: So you still stand. But soon you will kneel.  Know the folly of opposing the will of Azim!  These axes will not break! You have nowhere to hide!

Hien: Very well, then… Y’shtola ─ to me!  I shall take care of this!

[Hien limit-breaks the magical axe totem of Magnai.]

Magnai the Older: Hmph, predictable!

Hien: What!?

[Magnai binds Hien and Y’shtola in magical chains.]

Magnai the Older: Every step you will take, every move you will make ─ the Sun sees all!  Now, fall!

[Y’shtola breaks free and blasts Magnai with a powerful Holy attack.]

Y’shtola: Time to finish this!

Magnai the Older: Ungh… What strength ─ what grace is this?

[Magnai falls.]

[Sadu, the Warrior of Light, and the other onlookers come rushing over.]

Sadu: Ahhh, never have I felt such bliss in defeat! ‘Twas a battle to burn soul and flesh to ash. We Dotharl will lend you our strength as promised. Nhaama’s power is yours to wield. What does the Sun say to that?

Magnai: Hmph. The Sun is not driven by base motives such as yours. But aye, they have been judged…and found worthy.  It is the way of the Oronir to accord recognition and respect to the strong. You have made sufficient proof of your strength. The Sun shall answer your call.

Hien: You have our thanks. We are glad to call you allies.

[Magnai turns to Y’shtola.]

Magnai: You. By what are you called?

Y’shtola: Y’shtola. Why?

Magnai: Are you…?  Are you my Nhaama?

Y’shtola: I beg your pardon?

Magnai: In battle, you shone with all the majesty of the full moon’s light, your healing touch the embodiment of the Dusk Mother’s love.  Long had I wondered if my Nhaama might not be a woman of the Steppe. Beholding you, I am all but certain!  Now, look into my eyes. Could it be…? Could you be…?

Y’shtola: I am…not interested, little sun. Try again when you have become a man.

Magnai: Little…?

[Magnai is dumbfounded. Sadu finds this hilarious and bursts out laughing.]

Sadu: Little sun! Little sun!  Does it pain you, little sun? Crave you salve to soothe the ache? Fire to sear the wound in your heart?

[Once more Magnai and Sadu draw their weapons!]

[Y’shtola has had quite enough of this.]

Y’shtola: We have wasted enough time here. Cirina waits for word of our success.

[She walks off. Hien shrugs and follows.]

[Back in Moh Iloh.]

Cirina: …You had not only to contend with Sadu, but Magnai too!? Such a fierce battle that must have been. Yet here you stand, triumphant. Having passed such a test, they could not well deny you their allegiance.  The Mol will make no such demands. Weak though we are, we will gladly stand with you. The Steppe is our home, and we will defend it with all our being.

Hien: You have my heartfelt thanks! Of all the tribes of the Steppe, there is none I would rather have at my side!

Cirina: Gods willing, many more will rally to our cause. I shall send you word when we have answers from all the tribes.

Hien: I cannot thank you enough, Cirina. None of this would have been possible without you.

Quest: The Call

Y’shtola: We have the requisite consent. ‘Tis time to put Nhaama’s power to use.  If the aether flows as planned, all that remains is to have the Ironworks’ engineers do their work at the ruins. Come, let us return to the House of the Crooked Coin.

[Back at the House of the Crooked Coin.]

Y’shtola: I shall begin at once. You may wish to step back.

[Y’shtola raises her hands and summons aether into the Pillars.  After several minutes, the glow fades and Y’shtola slumps, looking exhausted.]

Hien: Did it work?

Y’shtola: It did. Aether may flow freely to the Burn once more.

Hien: I do not pretend to understand what you did, Y’shtola, but you did it! Thanks to you ─ and Auric, of course ─ we have taken a momentous step towards securing our defenses.  Now, as much as I believe a rest is in order, we should probably make haste back to the enclave.

Y’shtola: Agreed. The others may already have returned from their missions, and I would know how things stand.

Hien: As would I. Without further ado, then.

[Back at the Kienkan in the Doman Enclave. Alisaie, Yugiri, and Hakuro have also returned.]

Alisaie: Judging by your triumphant expressions, I take it all went well on the Azim Steppe.

Y’shtola: Indeed. We have secured a suitable source of energy for the barrier.

Alisaie: Good. Tataru and I have commissioned Garlond Ironworks to ensure that the field generators function as they should. A team of engineers stand ready to set out for the Burn at a moment’s notice. You need only say the word.

Hien: I thank you for engaging their services on our behalf. The minutiae of the arrangement, you may leave to me.  Which just leaves the small matter of our alliance. So, Yugiri and Hakuro…how fared you with our neighbors?

Yugiri: My lord. All of the factions we approached are in agreement that the Empire poses a threat, and many responded positively to talk of an alliance.  From Hingashi and Sui-no-Sato, however, we received outright rejections. The former will not break its treaty with the Empire and the latter will not involve itself in conflict.

Hien: Just as we expected, then. Well, there is naught to be done about it. We must focus on the rest. To each of the nations that were amenable to an alliance, I will personally send a missive. And once I have attended to that, I believe we will have done everything we can to fortify Doma’s defenses ─ for the time being at least. All of which means I may leave for the meeting in Ala Mhigo with a lighter heart. Yugiri, Hakuro ─ if you would be so kind as to hold the fort in my absence. My friends, we could not have achieved so much in so little time without your help. For that, I give you my heartfelt thanks. Till the meeting, then.

Alisaie: I took the liberty of asking Thancred to attend as well. He should have arrived in the Ala Mhigan Quarter by now.

Y’shtola: Then let us not keep him waiting. Shall we?

[in Ala Mhigo, the Lochs, the Ala Mhigan Quarter. Thancred is waiting.]

Thancred: Y’shtola has told me all. And I duly told Urianger and Krile. Krile, in particular, was concerned about Alphinaud, but I assured her that everything that can be done is being done. She agreed to continue with her own tasks for the time being on the condition that I contact her the moment there is any development. So, that leaves four of us to attend the council. Arenvald is here to assist with security, incidentally, though the poor lad seems altogether too distracted for the task. Another one missing Alphinaud, I expect. Ah, but it’s almost time. As soon as you are ready, present yourself to the guardsman at the palace entrance. I shan’t be far behind.

Resistance Guard: Ah, the Scions of the Seventh Dawn, welcome to Ala Mhigo! The Alliance leaders have already arrived. May I show you to the meeting chamber?

[In the meeting chamber.]

[Present are the leaders of Ul’dah, Gridania, Limsa Lominsa, and Ishgard. Also present are Lyse and Raubahn.]

Nanamo Ul Namo: Mistress Lyse. Commander Aldynn. It gives me great pleasure to formally welcome the city-state of Ala Mhigo to the Eorzean Alliance.

Raubahn: The pleasure is ours, Your Grace. I know I speak for all Ala Mhigans when I say that we are glad of this chance to stand with our comrades of the Alliance.

Kan-E-Senna: And we for our part are glad indeed to be able to welcome friends both old and new…

[Hien bows while seated.]

Hien: Lord Hien of Doma, at your service. Pray accept my heartfelt thanks for your generous invitation.

Aymeric: Nay, ’tis we who must thank you for journeying so far. And ‘twould be remiss of me not to acknowledge the part the Scions of the Seventh Dawn have played in bringing all of us together.  In times of great unrest, you and yours have been our constant companions, without whom we would not be here.

Nanamo Ul Namo: With apologies to Lord Hien and Mistress Alisaie, it occurs to me that we have not gathered in this way since that fateful day in Ul’dah.

Raubahn: The day I lost my arm and my freedom… As I lay in my cell, never did I dream that I would one day be given the chance to represent my homeland at this council.  I would not even be alive had you not plucked me from the jaws of death ─ you, Yugiri, and Alphinaud. Would that the lad could be with us…

Alisaie: I too owe my presence here to Alphinaud. In so many ways… Until such time as he returns, I mean to carry on his good work as best I can.

Nanamo Ul Namo: Come, friends ─ let us leave the past in the past, and turn our eyes to the future. My lord Hien, pray tell us how things stand in the East.

[Hien briefs the group on the recent events in Doma.]

Kan-E-Senna: Having heard the rumors of dissent in Garlemald, I dared to dream of a peaceable solution…

Merlwyb: Hm. The Empire will not so easily change its ways. If the Garleans have a mind to take back Doma and Ala Mhigo, we’ll be hard-pressed to stop them. Even with the might of six nations. But while we lack the strength to fight the tide, a course may yet present itself if we read the winds aright.

Aymeric: The winds suggest but one course to me ─ one which leads from the sea unto the river and thence to the source of all our woes.

Nanamo Ul Namo: The Ascians.

Aymeric: Indeed. All here have felt their blighted touch. It was the Bringers of Chaos who nurtured the archbishop’s tyrannical ambitions…  They who bestowed upon him the secrets of summoning, as they have so many others, before and since. And while they remain, we shall know no peace.

Raubahn: Our objective is clear. The question is how to achieve it. That our enemy parades about in Zenos’s skin poses problems in itself, but ere we get to them, how are we to infiltrate the Empire and get close enough to strike?

Thancred: While I see the wisdom in targeting the Ascians, an assassination attempt on Garlean soil would do little to aid our cause…even were it to succeed. It’s time we used our enemy’s preferred tactic

Y’shtola: You have an idea?

Merlwyb: Speak your mind, Master Thancred. None here know the enemy better than the Scions, and you mayhap best of all.  Whatever it is you propose, we will give it fair hearing. On that you have my word.

Thancred: Very well, Admiral. My proposal is thus.  We dispatch the shinobi to imperial territory. There, they sow the rumor that the crown prince perished in the battle for Ala Mhigo, and that the man parading around is in fact a corpse inhabited by a servant of darkness.

Raubahn: Well…it does have the ring of truth about it. And were the Garleans to learn that their future ruler is a puppet, the Empire would be shaken to the core.

Lyse: But ─ at the risk of sounding stupid ─ would they actually believe such an unlikely story? I didn’t.

Thancred: Ordinarily not. But prior to his miraculous recovery, rumors of Zenos’s death had already begun to circulate around the Empire.  Ultimately, however, what the masses believe is not our chief concern. Our true objective is to create an opening for rival factions within Garlemald to exploit.

Hien: Just as a war of succession erupted in the wake of Emperor Solus’s death!

Thancred: A war which raged until but recently, plunging the imperial house into disarray as nephew and uncle grappled for the throne. It is no coincidence that one of Varis’s first acts as Emperor was to name Zenos heir apparent ─ family feuds being so tiresome when armies are involved. Not all welcomed his choice of successor, however. There is no shortage of individuals who aspire to the throne ─ who would jump at any chance to seize power. The news that Zenos is not only dead, but a puppet to diabolical forces, would be too enticing to ignore.

Hien: The Empire would not be quick to recover from a second war of succession.

Thancred: I am no stranger to infiltrating imperial territory. With a team of operatives gathered from among the Alliance’s finest, the plan should have a reasonable chance of success.

Hien: Doma already has shinobi in place throughout the provinces. We stand ready to act, and act we must. What say you all?

Merlwyb: I am for Master Thancred’s proposal. We shine a light upon the Ascian and test the Empire’s unity. ‘Twas his plot that scuttled Doma’s negotiations, was it not? Why then, if we can eliminate him, there may yet be a chance for peace. Let us wage this war of subterfuge, that we may one day lay down our arms. Gods know, we never will while the Ascians remain.

[Nods all around the table.]

[Suddenly the Warrior of Light is hit with what seems like an Echo. But this one is different somehow.  A strange distorted ringing sound can be heard. The vision is strangely refracted and there is an unknown male voice speaking in broken phrases.]

Mysterious Voice: That way….sorrow…

[The Warrior of Light stands in a featureless black void.]

Mysterious Voice: History…must be changed…

[“Who is this?”][I don’t understand.]

Mysterious Voice: Ahead looms a Calamity. Ahead looms Light, expunging all form and life.  Twin dooms only you can forestall. Only you.

Raubahn: What’s the matter!?

[Through distortion, the Warrior of Light sees that his fellow Scions — Thancred, Y’shtola, and Alisaie — all seem to be experiencing what he is, even though they do not possess the Echo. Perhaps this isn’t the Echo at all. No one else at the table seems to be affected.]

Alisaie: There’s…there’s a voice…

Merlwyb: Spies in our midst!?

Kan-E-Senna: Nay. I sense no such presence.

[Back in the void.]

Mysterious voice: Let expanse contract, eon become instant…Throw wide the gates that we may pass!

[The bewildering vision fades and the Scions are released from its grasp.]

Y’shtola: Is it over?

[Without warning, Thancred collapses to the floor. ]

Aymeric: Master Thancred!

[Kan-E-Senna bends over him in concern.]

Kan-E-Senna: Twelve forfend… Bear him to a private chamber. Have every healer make ready.  Swiftly!

[Later, outside the meeting hall.]

Resistance Healer: Master Thancred remains in slumber. Though his vital signs appear stable, he is unresponsive.

Lyse: What could have done this? And why just him and not the others?

Resistance Healer: I’m afraid we could not identify the cause, my lady. Our examinations revealed no wounds, nor the presence of any poisonous substances…

Lyse: Gods, that only makes it worse. You’re to let us know the moment there’s any change, all right?

[The leaders of the Eorzean Alliance arrive.]

Alisaie: Thank you for coming. Knowing Thancred, he would apologize for being otherwise engaged at so crucial a juncture.

Kan-E-Senna: In gifting us a course of action, Thancred sowed the seed of all that is to follow. We have but to nurture it as best we can. To him I would say rest easy, that he may wake to enjoy the fruits of our labors.  Now, the matter of the mysterious voice must not be forgotten. Will you tell me exactly what happened?

Y’shtola: Alisaie and I heard a voice in the moments before Thancred collapsed. It was accompanied by a severe headache ─ as if something were clutching at our minds. Did you experience the same thing?

[The Warrior of Light tries to describe the strange experience.]

Alisaie: …So, in between the voice and the pain, you felt as if you were somewhere else entirely?

Kan-E-Senna: Your testimony confirms my suspicion. That which you experienced was, I believe, your soul being plucked from your flesh. Called.

Y’shtola: Called?

Kan-E-Senna: I myself examined Thancred. Reach out as I may, I could not sense in him the spark of life that is his soul. That Thancred alone was stricken so is likely due to his heightened sensitivity to the effects of aether ─ a consequence of his prior possession by the Ascian Lahabrea. The owner of the voice, whoever it may be, reached out to you ─ called your souls ─ and in so doing caused you and yours such pain.

Alisaie: But…if that’s true, where exactly are we being called to?

Kan-E-Senna: I know not. Yet one thing is plain:  whoever waits for you on the other side is possessed of a power unlike any I have ever known.

Y’shtola: Forgive us, Lyse, but may we leave Thancred in your care for a time?

Lyse: As if you had to ask. I may not be a Scion anymore, but I’m no less a friend.  Don’t worry, I’ll see to it that Thancred’s well looked after. Just focus on solving this mystery, all right?

Y’shtola: Thank you, Lyse.  As the Elder Seedseer says, ’tis no ordinary individual we are dealing with. Nor can we discount the possibility of Ascian involvement.

Alisaie: Whoever or whatever is behind this, the sooner we find out the better.  I just tried to call Urianger on his linkpearl. He didn’t respond, but I dare to hope that he possesses some knowledge we do not.

[Alisaie’s linkpearl chimes.]

Alisaie: …Ah, Urianger! Something happened during the meeting. Thancred’s collapsed. A disembodied voice suddenly started ─

[Alisaie pauses at something Urianger says.]

Alisaie: …What? But that’s… We should talk about this in person. …All right. We’ll meet you there.

[Alisaie shuts off the linkpearl.]

Alisaie: That was Urianger. He heard the voice too!

Y’shtola: In Thanalan? Hm. As we alone were afflicted at the meeting, I had my suspicions, but if the voice also spoke to Urianger, there can be little doubt:   the Scions were targeted specifically. By whom and to what end is the question. One to which we must find an answer with all possible haste.

Quest: Prelude in Violet

Alisaie: Urianger agreed to meet us at the Rising Stones. If any of the others heard the voice, we’ll find out soon enough.

Lyse: Good luck. I should get back to the meeting with the Elder Seedseer, but if there’s anything I can do ─ anything at all ─ you must let me know, all right? Promise me.

Alisaie: Right, let’s be on our way.

[Back at the Rising Stones. Urianger is waiting.]

Alisaie: Urianger! Gods it’s good to see you!

Urianger: Would that our meeting were under happier circumstances. I judged the voice sufficient cause for concern even before you sent word of its effect on our comrade…

Y’shtola: You heard it too, then?

Urianger: Aye. And all but certainly at the selfsame instant. Alas, pained as I was, I could make little sense of what few words did then reach mine ears.

Y’shtola: Who do you think is responsible? Could this be the Ascians’ doing?

Urianger: That I cannot say. Not when so little is known.  Ere I indulge in speculation, I would examine Thancred with mine own eyes.

Alisaie: To Ala Mhigo, then ─ without further delay!

Y’shtola: One other thing. During my visit to the Far East, I observed a strange phenomenon.

Urianger: Thou referest, I presume, to the localized reduction in aetheric density?

Y’shtola: Well, that spares me the trouble of an explanation. Yes. I noted precisely that at two apparently unconnected locations. I take it the phenomenon is not limited to the Far East?

Urianger: Indeed not. Of late, our agents charged with surveilling the beast tribes have spoken of little else. In every corner of the realm, they tell of places in which the aether hath grown thin.  Naturally, my suspicions first turned to primal activity, but the areas thus affected betray no evidence of summoning. I must confess to being quite perplexed.

Y’shtola: If the same phenomenon is being observed in multiple locations on opposite sides of the world, we may safely discount regional factors. Needless to say, this warrants further investigation.

Urianger: Indeed. I shall make it my task to ─

[The Warrior of light sees a flash, as if Urianger has become a photo negative of himself. Urianger gasps and clutches his head.]

Urianger: The voice… It calleth to me once more…

[There is another flash, and then another. Urianger rocks as if struck and falls to his knees. Y’shtola gasps as the same effect takes hold of her.]

Y’shtola: I…I hear it too!

[The Voice strikes the Warrior of Light and Alisaie.]

Mysterious Voice: Only you. Only you.

Alisaie: Ah! Unnngh! No…! Y’shtola…Urianger…

Mysterious Voice: Throw wide… the gates…

[The effect stops. Alisaie looks up.]

Alisaie: No! NO! This can’t be happening!

[Urianger and Y’shtola have fallen to the floor and lie still.]

Alisaie: Y’shtola! Urianger! Open your eyes!

[Alisaie runs to Urianger’s side and shakes him.]

Alisaie: Open your eyes, I beg you… Say something…anything… Not again… Please! Not again!

[The lesser-ranked Scions gather around their fallen leaders as the screen fades to black.]

[Later.]

Alisaie: Forgive me, that was an unseemly display…

Hoary Boulder: It happened before your very eyes, my lady. None here would have behaved any differently.  We have borne the two of them to a private chamber. But tell me, is it true that Master Thancred languishes in a like state in Ala Mhigo?

Alisaie: I’m afraid so. Though, given the circumstances, it would seem best to observe them together. I will send word to Lyse that he should be brought here.

Hoary Boulder: Take heart, my lady. The world is full of scholars and knowledgeable folk of every persuasion. Someone out there is bound to know what ails our comrades, and how it may be cured. Thus will we rouse them ─ no matter what.

Alisaie: That we will, Hoary. That we will.  But first things first ─ our comrades will have questions. May I ask that you explain the situation to them? I must attend to a private matter.

[The Warrior of Light gives her a questioning look.]

Alisaie: Oh, I promised I’d visit someone in Limsa Lominsa. He’s been waiting at Maelstrom Command for a while now.  …You know, you should come along too. I think he’d be glad to see you.

[At Maelstrom Command in Limsa Lominsa.]

Alisaie: As you’ve probably guessed, it’s Ga Bu we’ve come to see. The private here will bring him out to us.  Ever since the Maelstrom took him in, I’ve tried to visit as often as I can. And after what befell our friends, I was taken by the urge to visit again. It’s…difficult to explain.

[A Storm Private brings out Ga Bu, the kobold child.]

Storm Private: Here he is, my lady.

Alisaie: Ga Bu…it’s been too long.

Ga Bu: …

Storm Private: I’m afraid there has been no change. If he can see or hear us, he has given no sign…

Alisaie: I see. You’re still fighting. I’m proud of you. We promised that we would come and visit you together, didn’t we. Alphinaud and I. I’m sorry that we haven’t managed that yet. You know, with the three of us like this, does it not remind you of that night? Of the stars beyond count, twinkling in the heavens? I was feeling pretty low back then. Powerless. But I knew that my brother was close by if I needed him. And that the others would be waiting for me back at the Rising Stones. Not like now. I’ve seen my share of trouble since coming to Eorzea. …Been reminded again and again of my limitations ─ of how little I can change about this world. And I’ve come to know the sorrow of parting all too well. But to have the people I hold dear struck down before my eyes, and be powerless to help them…? That ─  That I cannot bear.

[“You still have me.”][You don’t have to bear this burden alone.]

Alisaie: And for that I am grateful. I don’t know what I’d do without you. Well, that’s more than enough brooding for one day. Come on. We have friends to save. Let’s return to the Rising Stones and take it from there.

[Back at the Rising Stones.]

Alisaie: Thanks again for agreeing to come. It meant a lot to me. I did some thinking on the way back, and I think Hoary is right:  we need to seek outside help. Ordinarily, we would turn to our own experts on such matters, but they’re both among the stricken… I will begin by reaching out to the myriad guilds and research institutions here in Eorzea. Additionally, Grandfather and Minfilia had a wealth of connections between them, and I mean to explore those avenues too. We’ll find a way to save everyone, mark my words. Much and more has happened in recent days. Some of it for the good, some…not so. But all around me, people continue their fight. From the shinobi who search for Alphinaud to the Alliance members who make ready to move against the Empire, they march on in the face of great adversity, bearing heavy burdens. Everyone is playing their part…and so must I. You have your own part to play, I know, and it’s bigger than most. So I won’t keep you. Just promise that you’ll visit from time to time, and I promise I’ll have good tidings to share with you when you do.

[Meanwhile, in the Imperial Palace…]

[Emperor Varis stands before a dais, his back to Zenos.]

Zenos: The Populares no longer present an obstacle. Now is the time to bring the Empire’s might to bear. A word from Your Radiance is all it takes. But one word, and the imperial army will fall upon Ala Mhigo as a pack of bloodthirsty wolves and tear that feeble nation apart. Have you no words for me? Despite the lengths I go to ─ an Emissary, playing the part of a fool.

[A flashback shows Elidibus removing his mask, revealing Zenos’ face beneath.]

Zenos: When first I took this face, I swore to use all of my knowledge, all of my power, to further the cause of the Empire. My deeds stand testament to my commitment.  And with this adamant flesh at my disposal, I could destroy the eikon-slayer as easily as one might swat a fly. Why do you hesitate?

[Varis does not reply. Zenos-Elidibus sighs deeply.]

Zenos: Our enemy is resourceful. Though victory is certain now, it will not remain so indefinitely. Deliberate if you must, but be quick about it. We will speak again when you have unburdened yourself of doubt. Until then, I take my leave…Father.

[Zenos-Elidibus leaves.]

[A man speaks from the shadows.]

???: I should be the one to sigh.  I played my part to perfection. I had earned my rest. And then, thanks to Lahabrea’s crowning act of idiocy, our favorite Emissary sees fit to summon me back.

[The man steps forward. He has brown hair with a white forelock and a Garlean Third Eye. He wears black leather armor with gold metal and white fur trim.]

???: Elidibus was ever a worrier. A most tiresome trait, would you not agree?

[Varis looks down at the floor in silence.]

???: What, have you no words for me either? No matter. I’ve long grown weary of this mummery.  Now, my dearest grandson. Let me remind you of your place, in the simplest of terms.  You do not make judgments ─ you administer them. Swiftly and to the letter. Naught else is your concern.

[Varis bares his teeth in a snarl.]

???: Elidibus may be an insufferable bore, but he is no fool. His choices as emissary seldom err. If aught threatens the balance ‘twixt Light and Dark, it falls to you to remove it. Be it by your own hands or by your armies, you have ample means at your disposal.

Solus zos Galvus: That is why this empire exists ─ why I built it.

[Varis frowns, simmering with anger.]

Solus zos Galvus: Oh dear. Have I touched a nerve? You always were an easy one to read. I pity you, I do. As they say, ignorance is bliss. And I know how much happier you would be not knowing the things you know. The founding father was an Ascian! And he created the Empire solely for the purpose of sowing the seeds of chaos! Don’t take it personally. I merely do my duty. To bring about a Calamity requires no small amount of power. And there is no surer way to obtain such power than by collecting powerful pawns. To that end, I have labored long and hard, and I must say I am quite pleased with my handiwork ─ paltry though it seems in comparison to Allag.

[A shot rings out. The Ascian falls to the floor. Varis holds a smoking gun.]

Varis zos Galvus: You fiends are overfond of your own voices.  Mark me, Ascian. Man is the master of his own destiny!

[Varis stares at the corpse on the floor. Behind him, there is a swirl of violet smoke and another Solus zos Galvus materializes. Varis doesn’t seem at all surprised by this.]

Solus zos Galvus: Such a waste of time and energy. Both yours and mine. Lest you forget, you are Emperor now. If you wish to spout drivel about man’s destiny, save it for the masses. It will serve to give them a sense of purpose…and you pliant pieces for the game. Oh, do stop sulking, boy. You of all people should understand. Ours is a struggle to restore both mankind and the world to their rightful state. Viewed thus, our goals are one and the same.

[Solus zos Galvus walks out of the throne room leaving Varis behind.]

[Meanwhile, at a resistance encampment, somewhere in the Empire…]

[Alphinaud and Shadowhunter, with Shadowhunter’s two comrades, approach a group of tents.  A dozen bodies lie lifeless before a dead campfire. Alphinaud and the Imperial trio run forward to investigate.]


Alphinaud: What in the world…?  Dead… All dead. Yet I see no wounds, nor any evidence of battle…

Shadowhunter: Damn them. They finally used it.  The Empire developed an alchemical weapon in Gyr Abania. A gas. “Black Rose,” it was called, and to breathe it is to breathe your last.

Alphinaud: And that did this?

Shadowhunter: I thought the project abandoned, and its vile fruit destroyed. But naught else could have wrought such an atrocity.  Fools… What do they hope to gain with this butchery? Can they not see that a rule won through terror will not endure? How many more provinces must they lose!?  Nay…wait. This is not the work of men, but monsters. The Ascians. It cannot be a coincidence that their trail led us here. Their objective was never to rule, but to sow strife and discord.

Alphinaud: Such a crime does indeed bear the mark of the Bringers of Chaos.  Black Rose cannot be allowed to kill again. We must find the Ascians and put an end to their plot.

[Alphinaud and the Imperial trio head further into the mountains together.]


[The Warrior of Light checks in with Alisaie at the Rising Stones.]

Alisaie: I’m glad you’ve come, though I’m afraid there’s little in the way of good news. After you left, we reached out to both the Alchemist’s Guild and Stillglade Fane, and attempted all manner of treatments… But the results were always the same. Whatever the answer is, it’s not alchemy or conjury… Why did it have to be Y’shtola and Urianger, and not me? Out of all of us, they are the ones who could feasibly have solved this puzzle. And Alphinaud’s still missing. Gods, it’s all going wrong… Where do we even start?

???: A grave situation, indeed. Might I be of some assistance?

[Krile has arrived at the Rising Stones.]

Alisaie: Krile! I thought you busy delving into the mysteries of Eureka…

Krile: When word reached me of the plight of our friends, I could not well stay away. As a fellow Scion, not to mention your erstwhile mentor, this is one of those times you should feel free to call on me ─ regardless of my personal circumstances.

Alisaie: I… Yes, I should have thought of that.  Thank you for coming, Krile. We would welcome your insight.

Krile: And I should be happy to provide it. Now, what’s this I hear about Alphinaud heading into imperial territory? That boy always did have some funny ideas. Do you remember the speech he gave when he was accepted to the Studium?

Alisaie: “My life’s goal is naught less than the salvation of this star!”

Krile: That particular grand pronouncement has been a source of great embarrassment to him, as you know. But the fact of the matter is, he meant every word, and has lived his life accordingly.

Alisaie: Yes, he remains altruistic to a fault. But I’m worried he was too fixated on his goals to see the dangers, as has happened before…

Krile: You needn’t be so concerned. Though his values remain the same, Alphinaud is not the blinkered boy he once was. Slowly but surely, his eyes have been opened ─ thanks to a certain someone. A certain someone whom he’d be mortified to learn had heard about his little speech. Mum’s the word, eh? Right, I had better have a look at our patients. They’re in the infirmary, I assume? I’ll need absolute quiet, so it would be best if I did this alone. If you’ll excuse me…

[Krile heads to the infirmary, and everyone waits to hear her analysis. Eventually, the lala researcher returns.]

Krile: All three are in fine physical health. At a glance, I would say they were merely sound asleep… …Except for the fact that I couldn’t sense the slightest trace of “them” in their bodies. It’s as if their souls have taken leave of their physical forms.

Alisaie: Ah. Yes. The Elder Seedseer made a similar observation.

Krile: I’ve read the report. When you heard this mysterious voice, you described feeling as if you were “somewhere else,” yes?

[The Warrior of Light nods.]

Krile: If we assume the aether which comprises your essence is being drawn to some other place… Then it may be possible to follow the trail it leaves behind, just as we did in our search for Thancred.

Alisaie: I wasn’t around for that. But I can’t imagine it was easy.

Krile: Oh, it wasn’t. But that’s no reason not to try. I will have need of Master Matoya’s Crystal Eye if I’m even to make the attempt, so I suggest we pay her a visit.

[And we’re off to remote caves of the Dravanian Hinterlands.]

Alisaie: I’d heard Master Matoya was something of a recluse, but this seems…extreme. Still, I’ll happily overlook her eccentricities if she agrees to help us.

[We enter Matoya’s Cave.]

Matoya: Come to disturb my peace again, have you? I hide myself away in a cave, and still you people insist on pestering me with your problems.

[Matoya takes a closer look.]

Matoya: Oh. I mistook you for young what’s-his-name, but I see now you’re the sister. Weren’t you supposed to be the lively one? I’ve seen happier faces at a rain-sodden burial.

[Alisaie isn’t in the mood for this.]

Alisaie: Well, I’m sorry to dash your expectations, but the situation isn’t exactly conducive to gaiety.

Matoya: Ah, that’s more like it. Shtola used to spit and hiss like a wildcat, too. Better for a young thing like you to be filled with fire, and leave the doom and gloom to your elders.  Now, what exactly does this tragic situation of yours have to do with me?

Krile: If I may, Master Matoya, we have need of your Crystal Eye once more…

[Krile explains the situation and her findings.]

Matoya: And Shtola is one of the afflicted, is she?  Very well. She may be an ungrateful stray, but she’s my ungrateful stray. And I’ll not see her buried before I am.

[Matoya brings out the Crystal Eye and sets it on the table. Krile gazes into it.]

Krile: Right. Let us see what we can see.  I’ll begin from where our friends first fell, and cast my senses out from there…

Alisaie: …What is it? Did you find them!?

Krile: Th-This doesn’t make sense. How is it even possible…?

Alisaie: How is what possible!? Krile, what did you see!?

Krile: Th-The threads, they just…they just ended. And, no, I didn’t lose track of them ─ I followed them as far as they went. It’s as if ─  It’s as if they were cut off.

Alisaie: Could their aether have dissipated? If it had ─  Oh gods… Their bodies are just husks. It’s like the broodmother’s daughter all over again…

Krile: No, no, this is different. The Qalyana girl was already dead, body and soul, when Lakshmi effected her resurrection.

Matoya: Aye, let’s not jump to conclusions. If their physical forms yet breathe and show no signs of wasting, then it follows that their souls must still be intact somewhere.

Alisaie: But where!?

Matoya: That’s the question, isn’t it, girl? Death has not taken them to the aetherial sea, yet there are no tracks left for us to follow.

Alisaie: We’re no closer to an answer than when we started. But knowing their souls are still out there is progress of a sort. We just have to keep looking.

[Alisaie’s linkpearl chimes.]

Alisaie: Pray excuse me a moment.

[Alisaie listens.]

Alisaie: Yes? …I remember, but ─  …What, to Ala Mhigo!? We’re on our way!

[Alisaie shuts off the linkpearl.]

Alisaie: That was Lyse. Apparently, a group of Populares have defected to Ala Mhigo, and Maxima ─ the envoy Alphinaud left with ─ is one of them!  I’m sorry, I realize we’ve barely begun here, but…

Matoya: Go, child, go. You’ve made up your mind, and life’s too short for dithering.

Krile: I’ll do some digging in the meantime, and see if there isn’t some other method we could use to continue the search.

Alisaie: Let’s be off, then!

[There’s a clattering sound. One of Matoya’s magic broom servants has fallen to the ground and lies still.]

Matoya: Bah, not again… The enchantment barely seems to take, these days. I’d chalk it up to old age, but I rather doubt it’s that simple.

[With a wave of her hand, Matoya re-enchants the broom. It rises and begins sweeping again.]

Alisaie: Before they…took ill, Y’shtola and Urianger were sharing notes on a “thinning” of the aether. It seems to be happening all over.

Matoya: Does it now? And here I was, all set to blame my woes on that creaking mountain of refuse clogging up the Thaliak.  I fear something has gone awry. Still, there’s naught to be gained from starting at shadows. You can only do what can be done, and that but one thing at a time!

[Alisaie, Krile, and the Warrior of Light depart the cave.]

Alisaie: So that was the woman who tamed Y’shtola… I had the distinct feeling of being grabbed by the scruff of the neck and having the nonsense shaken out of me.  When Alphinaud is back, I’d like to visit again and ask her what tales she has of Grandfather.

Quest: A Defector’s Tidings

Alisaie: I almost can’t bear to hear what Maxima has to tell us…  But it can’t be bad news, can it? Lyse would have said. Unless ─  Agh, there’s no point speculating. Lyse said she’d notified the guards of our coming, so we should head straight to the palace gate in the Ala Mhigan Quarter.

Krile: I’ll be praying for good news. Learn what you can about Alphinaud’s plight, and leave the search for our friends’ lost souls to me.

[Krile returns to Matoya’s cave. Alisaie and the Warrior of Light depart.]

[In the Lochs of Ala Mhigo, at the Ala Mhigan Quarter.]

Resistance Guard: Greetings, Scions ─ the commander told me to expect you. Shall I show you in?

[In the Royal Palace]

Lyse: I’m sorry to drag you halfway across the realm, but when Maxima mentioned Alphinaud, I thought you’d want to hear the news in person.

[Maxima rises and speaks to the Warrior of Light.]

Maxima: Ah, we meet again…though I was hoping our reunion would be under more auspicious circumstances.

Alisaie: What happened to my brother? Where is Alphinaud?

Maxima: Never fear, my lady. Your brother was in fine health when I took my leave of him, and I have no reason to assume that has changed.

Alisaie: You assume!?

Maxima: If you will allow me, I shall endeavor to explain events. Our troubles began not long after we departed Doma. While crossing the Burn, we were fired upon by the Emperor’s personal guard, and forced to make an emergency landing. As we stumbled from the wreckage, our attackers fell upon us again, and we would have perished there and then were it not for the intercession of a third party… A band of mercenaries whose leader claimed to pursue a vendetta against the Ascians. This “Shadowhunter,” as he styled himself, then escorted us out of the wastes to relative safety. Upon arriving back in civilization, I gathered my Populares colleagues and prepared to flee the Empire. Master Alphinaud, however, declined the invitation to join us, preferring to continue his investigation into the Ascian threat.

[Alisaie is visibly relieved.]

Alisaie: Well…at least he’s not lying in a heap in the Burn.  Tell us more about these Ascian hunters. Who are they? And is Alphinaud still with them?

Maxima: He is. As to who they are, I am afraid I have nothing to tell you. Beyond the fact that they root out and destroy Ascians, they were unwilling to divulge anything which might serve to identify them. They would not even reveal their next destination…but Master Alphinaud asked to accompany them all the same. Since parting company with your brother, we’ve been engaged in a game of cat and mouse with the Emperor’s guard. We made our way through province after province, finding the army busy “restoring order” wherever we went, until we finally arrived here in Ala Mhigo. I cannot thank Commander Aldynn enough for giving us such an unexpectedly warm welcome.

Raubahn: I’m not inclined to turn away refugees, no matter which land they call home. And if they can tell me how things lie in Garlemald…all the better.

Maxima: On that subject, there is much I would tell you. During the course of our journey, we heard tales that an entire rebel army had been slaughtered in the space of a single night. It would seem my former comrades grew tired of putting down uprisings in the conventional manner, and chose instead to bring a formidable new weapon to bear. Details were sparse, but the rumor alone was enough to dampen the flames of rebellion. I have also heard reports that several companies have withdrawn from their designated provinces and begun marching westward. It is my assessment that the Empire’s forces are mobilizing for a large-scale military engagement.

Lyse: Westward? You mean they’re getting ready to invade Ala Mhigo!?

Raubahn: We knew this was coming. But not that it would be so soon.

[Lyse is understandably alarmed by this news.]

Lyse: We’ve barely even begun to shore up our defenses! They won’t stop an invading army!

Raubahn: …No, they won’t.

[Raubahn begins barking orders to his men.]

Raubahn: Dispatch messengers to the Alliance leadership requesting reinforcements. And send word to our officers in the field to hasten completion of those border fortifications. Prepare to meet the imperials head-on!

[The General turns back to Lyse.]

Raubahn: No matter how quickly we act, we still want for time. When the enemy comes into view, our best recourse will be to open negotiations with their commander, and see that the ensuing proceedings take as long as possible.

[Lyse turns to the Warrior of Light.]

Lyse: Would you and Alisaie head to Doma and let Lord Hien know about this? I’m sure he’ll want to hear about Alphinaud too.

Alisaie: Consider it done. We’ll send word when ─

[Alisaie and the Warrior of Light grab their heads as a beginning-to-be-familiar Voice is heard.]

Mysterious Voice:  …Untold sorrow…must be changed…Ahead looms a calamity….Eon becomes instant. Throw wide the gates.

[After a few moments, the Voice stops.]

Alisaie: You heard it too? Well, at least we’re both still standing.

Lyse: Oh, thank the gods ─ I thought we’d lost you for a moment there. Why does this keep happening!?

Alisaie: I wish I knew. Nothing we’ve tried has brought us any closer to an answer…We’ll keep working on it, but first we need to go and see Lord Hien.

[Outside the Palace]

Alisaie: I’m actually glad Lyse tasked us with visiting Lord Hien ─ better to be dashing from place to place than sitting around stewing over things we can’t change. To the enclave!

[At the Kienkan in the Doman  Enclave]

[Hien is in his meeting room. Quite a few other people are present: Yugiri, Hakuro the wolfman, Tansui of the Confederacy pirates, Cirina of the Mol, an emissary of the Blue Kojin, and — surprisingly — emissaries from Dalmasca and Nagxia as well.]

Hien: Greetings, my friends. I was just discussing future endeavors with the members of our newly formed alliance. The Kojin and the Confederacy you already know, and it was your own strength of arms that won us the cooperation of the Steppe tribes. We have also been joined by our neighbors from Nagxia, and the indomitable citizens of Dalmasca…though the scattered nature of the latter’s resistance will somewhat delay their official induction. These proud peoples have united under a single purpose: to stand against the tyranny of the Garlean Empire.

Alisaie: I am glad to see your alliance is coming together so swiftly. As things stand, I fear we shall soon have need of your strength…

Hien: I thank you for bringing me news of Alphinaud. His fate is never far from my thoughts ─ and not only because he is our emissary. As for this sudden deployment of imperial forces, I agree that Ala Mhigo would be wise to shore up its borders with all haste.

Yugiri: Every report we receive from our shinobi indicates a massing of troops in the western provinces. It seems all but certain that the Empire is poised to bring its fist down upon Eorzea.

Hien: And I would help deflect that blow. But I cannot risk sending reinforcements just yet. We will remain vulnerable to airborne assault until our wall in the Burn is in place.

Alisaie: The all-important Allagan energy barrier.

Hien: The…energy barrier, yes. I thought to call it something more auspicious. A name drawn from the Four Lords of legend, perhaps ─ “Seiryu’s Aegis” or some such. Well, just a thought.

Yugiri: The Ironworks engineers report that they have finished calibrating the generators, and are ready to proceed to the testing stage.

[Hien turns to the Warrior of Light.]

Hien: Have you time to attend the first test? You’ve seen the field which protected Azys Lla firsthand, and I would be interested to hear how you think ours compares.

Alisaie: I will come too, if you don’t mind. Though I am no Y’shtola, I may be able to offer some insight.

Hien: Of course. Time being of the essence, it would be best if we made directly for the Burn. Yugiri, I leave you and Hakuro to bring the war council to a close.

Yugiri: Understood. Your mounts are saddled and ready, my lord. Ware the storms.

Quest: Seiryu’s Wall

Hien: We will cross the Burn by yol and falcon, as before. Join me at the overlook near the House of the Fierce.

[On a rocky outcrop in northern Yanxia. Hien waits with his yol.]

Hien: Give the word when you are ready to take wing!

[The word is given.]

[We arrive at the Burn. Cid’s crew have been very busy. Several field emitters have been set up and are being adjusted. ]

Hien: It seems the engineers have matters well in hand.  Should the barrier work as we intend, Doma will be free to reinforce her allies in Ala Mhigo without fear of weakening her own borders.

[Hien calls out to the engineers.]

Hien: Honored friends, the time has come to put your hard work to the test! Start the generator!

Ironworks Engineer: Node one is operational. Nodes two to eight are reporting similar energy levels. The barrier is forming!  …One thousand yalms. Two thousand. Three thousand. Expansion remains smooth. No fluctuations detected.

[A hexagonal field net rises from the ground into the sky.]

Ironworks Engineer: …Four thousand. Five thousand! Target altitude reached! The barrier is holding steady at five thousand yalms! We’ve done it!

[When the barrier is complete, the hexagonal field disappears, leaving the finished Wall invisible to ordinary sight.]

[A dark object is spotted in the sky, moving rapidly toward the wall installation site. Alisaie strains to see.]

Alisaie: …Is that an imperial airship? Of all the rotten timing…

Hien: But this is a gift, Mistress Alisaie. They can test our new wall for us!

Hien: Seems solid enough. Though I was hoping for a fireball.

[A hatch at the back of the ship opens and Shadowhunter walks out. He carries an unconscious Alphinaud in his arms.]

Alisaie: By the gods… It’s Alphinaud!

[Alisaie starts to run to Shadowhunter but Hien catches her arm and holds her back.]

Alisaie: What are you ─  Let me go! He has my brother!

Hien: Lower the barrier!

Shadowhunter: Be at ease, girl. The lad is not dead ─ merely locked in slumber.

Alisaie: No, not him too…

[Alphinaud is taken away to be looked after. Hien, Alisaie, and the Warrior of Light remain to speak to their Imperial guest.]

Shadowhunter: We could identify no cause and found no remedy. Thus I sought to return him to Doma ─ and into the arms of Lord Hien himself, it would seem. It is a day for fated reunions…

[Shadowhunter stares straight at the Warrior of Light.]

Shadowhunter: Would you not agree, adventurer? Or should I address you as the “Warrior of Light”?

[The Warrior of Light spots the white mask on Shadowhunter’s belt and sudden realization dawns.]

[Gaius van Baelsar….] [“The Black Wolf…”]

Gaius: Aye. Gaius van Baelsar, the Black Wolf. That was the title I was given. One I have long since relinquished.

[Everyone goes on full alert.]

Gaius: Stand down. The legatus of the XIVth Imperial Legion died in Castrum Meridianum. I am no more than Gaius Baelsar, a man without rank or allegiance.

Alisaie: Impossible! There’s no way you could have survived!

Gaius: Do you remember how it unfolded?

[Flashback, all the way to the Praetorium.]

Gaius: How I was deceived by Lahabrea? How I was convinced that reviving the Ultima Weapon would allow me to bring peace to Eorzea? The Ascian used me, as he used so many others ─ all to further the restoration of his wretched god. Yet even with the might of Allag at my command, you bested me. And as the Praetorium went up in flames, I was content to burn along with it…for a moment, at least. A moment of folly. To surrender my life thus would have been to betray all who died for my cause. It was for them that I dragged myself free of the rubble, and swore vengeance on the Ascians.

[Shadowhunter throws his old white armor mask onto the white sands of the Burn.]

Gaius: The Black Wolf has shed his pelt, never to return to Garlemald or her legions. I live now only to exact revenge. My principle quarry was to be Lahabrea, whom I gather you have since ushered unto oblivion. But so many more remain. Long has their kind lurked in the shadows, laboring to sow chaos throughout our world. I would see each and every one dragged into the light and put to the sword. Are the Scions not of like mind?

Alisaie: In this single respect, perhaps…

Gaius: Then I shall continue the partnership the boy began, and share what intelligence I have acquired. Among the Ascians, the black-masked ilk are subordinate to those who wear red. This, you already know. Yet among the red there exists a hierarchy. Those set adrift with the shards clearly stand below those still joined to the Source. Nabriales, who once dared to intrude upon the Rising Stones, belonged to the former group. And while he was indeed a dangerous foe, his powers were inconsequential next to the Paragons of the Source. The first was Lahabrea, who plagues us no more. There is also the white-robed Elidibus; and the elusive Emet-Selch, about whom little is known.

Alisaie: We have files on Lahabrea and Elidibus, but I believe this “Emet-Selch” is new to us…? As I assume my brother told you, we have evidence to suggest that an Ascian now walks in the body of the crown prince. Have you identified this interloper?

Gaius: Elidibus seems the most likely culprit. As “emissary,” it is his role to maintain the equilibrium between Darkness and Light. Your many deeds in Hydaelyn’s name have upset the balance, and I believe he seeks to restore it by throwing his considerable power behind the Empire. As a leader of the Ascians, he is one of our primary targets. It was on the trail of this very prey that the boy and I came across the scene of a failed uprising. In the absence of a single Garlean casualty, we inspected the bodies of the rebels, and the lack of any external injury drew my immediate attention. They had been slain by Black Rose ─ an alchemical invention of the imperial army. When I yet served as legatus, I ordered its production halted and all stockpiles destroyed. Toxic gas is a not a tool of conquest, but of extermination.

Alisaie: Toxic gas!? This must be the new weapon Maxima warned us about ─ something deadly enough to sweep away all resistance in a matter of hours.  Gods, you don’t think they’re planning to use this in Ala Mhigo, do you?

Gaius: Put your fears to rest. We infiltrated the production facility, and destroyed all existing stores of the chemical along with the plant itself. Even should they rebuild the operation, they will not soon manufacture another batch.

[Flashback: Shadowhunter and Alphinaud sabotaging the poison gas plant.]

Gaius: Regardless, I would draw your attention to a directive we discovered in the plant’s records. The document was marked with a recent date, and authorized with the signature of one Zenos yae Galvus.

Hien: A dead man signing the death warrant for thousands. ‘Tis bad comedy.

Gaius: But the tale does not end there ─ within that same facility was a chamber filled with devices of Allagan design. Cloning technology, we realized.

Gaius: And what should we find in each and every incubator…but a young Emperor Solus. …All of which prompts the question:  were the Ascians responsible for these abominations? Or was it the will of the Emperor? I must know which hand guides the Empire. Though I have given up my rank, I am yet a son of Garlemald…and I will fight for the future of my homeland. It is time I returned to the hunting of shadows. We should focus on our common foe ─ to reopen old quarrels now would serve no purpose.

Alisaie: You saved my brother’s life, so I’m willing to let sleeping dogs lie. But in truth, it’s not my decision to make.

[Alisaie looks at the Warrior of Light.]

[“You’re right. There are more important matters at hand.”][We’ll settle this another time.]

Gaius: There was a time when I scorned those who placed their faith in false gods ─ even as I, in my blinkered conviction, placed mine in Ascian promises.  Unlike yours, my strength of will ─ and my restraint ─ was found wanting. We shall meet again, Warrior of Light.

[Shadowhunter returns to his ship.]

Hien: So that was the infamous Black Wolf. An unexpected ally, to say the least…

[Shadowhunter’s ship departs.]

Hien: Well, I am content to leave the fine-tuning of the barrier to cleverer minds. Let us bid our friends from the Ironworks farewell and see what can be done for Alphinaud back in Doma.

[Hien and Alisaie turn to go. The Warrior of Light stares after the Black Wolf’s ship a moment longer, then departs.]

[Back in the Kienkan at the Doman Enclave.]

Hien: Alphinaud is safely ensconced in a private chamber. My finest healer is examining him as we speak.

[Alisaie walks in.]

Alisaie: I’ve spoken with the physician, and there are no outward signs of illness. Alphinaud is lost in a sleep from which he cannot be awoken…just like the others. It seems that even the lands of the Empire were not far enough away to escape that cursed voice…

Hien: I share your frustration, Alisaie, I do ─ but Alphinaud is returned to us alive and otherwise unharmed. All that remains is to find the means to wake him. Until then, you can but fulfill your duties as a Scion ─ yours and your brother’s both.

Alisaie: …You’re right, of course. There are arrangements to be made, and little time to make them.  To business then, my lord ─ now that we know “Seiryu’s Wall” works as intended, can we expect reinforcements for Ala Mhigo?

Hien: You most certainly can. As promised, we will send troops to bolster our allies in Eorzea without delay.

Yugiri: Pray be aware, however, that they will not arrive without delay. Save for some few who boast teleportation magicks, the bulk of our force must be transported by sea ─ a lengthy voyage for which the smaller vessels favored by the Confederacy are ill-equipped.

Hien: Accordingly, I mean to enlist the assistance of the East Aldenard Trading Company in finding suitable ships. As for navigating the distances in question, we are in the happy position of being able to call upon those who plotted the course of my people’s exodus to Eorzea.  Beyond the procurement of ships, I think it unlikely that our East Aldenard friends will consent to any involvement in military operations, but I am certain they will afford Alphinaud a berth aboard one of their vessels. I shall have a chirurgeon accompany him every ilm of the way to the Rising Stones.

Alisaie: You have my thanks, Lord Hien.

Hien: Yugiri ─ I will go on ahead with our friends to Ala Mhigo. Enlist all those capable of teleportation, and put them at the disposal of the Eorzean Alliance as soon as possible. They will form the vanguard.

Yugiri: Yes, my lord.

Alisaie: This is exactly what we’d hoped for. Lyse and the Alliance leaders will be glad indeed to welcome the combined strength of the East.

[Meanwhile, at the Black Rose chemical plant.]

[Emperor Varis and a technician survey the ruined controls of the chemical weapons plant.]

Imperial Magitek Engineer: Our supplies of Black Rose have been ruined, but the new plant is already under construction. We should have the first batch ready in time for the offensive, Your Radiance!

Varis zos Galvus: See that you do.

[The technician departs. Solus slinks out from behind a gas vat.]

Solus zos Galvus: Ah, yes! The infamous “Black Rose.” If I recall correctly, Gaius did not much care for the invention.  A ruthless and indiscriminate weapon indeed, this airborne poison. It seems you are capable of making decisions worthy of your bloodline.

Varis zos Galvus: With no gift for sorcery, we Garleans must look to magitek to even the odds. If it spares the needless deaths of our soldiers, and serves the cause of this empire, there is no method I would not employ.

Solus zos Galvus: How very noble of you.  Truly, though, I must commend you for embracing your role as emperor. You play the part of the determined ruler well. Sometimes, even I catch myself believing!

[Varis bares his teeth in a snarl. Solus couldn’t care less.]

Solus zos Galvus: A silent agent of death… Now that I think on it, Black Rose may well possess the perfect aspect. Slowly but surely, the deluge of Light has worked upon the aether here in the Source, and the gas should be most susceptible to its influence… Well, I shall leave you to your own devices. Go forth and bloody the land with your grand and glorious war.

Varis zos Galvus: …While you do what, precisely?

Solus zos Galvus: Need you ask? I will be doing what all Ascians do.

Varis zos Galvus: I am well aware that your kind exists only to usher in the next calamity. But you seem oblivious to the harm your singular agenda causes to the Empire.  You cannot have forgotten the events which followed your mortal demise.

[Varis clenches his fist in impotent rage.]

Varis zos Galvus: Our homeland was plunged into civil war for your failure to name a successor. The edifice you so carefully constructed was but a hair’s breadth from collapse!

[Solus zos Galvus rolls his eyes dramatically.]

Solus zos Galvus: Are you truly so naive?  You thought me oblivious to the consequences? Of a departure so painstakingly timed?

Varis zos Galvus: …It was by design!?

Solus zos Galvus: Well, of course it was! Though I will admit the resulting panic exceeded even my wildest expectations. But how can you be surprised? Throwing the world into disarray was the very purpose for which this nation was, as you say, “so carefully constructed.”

Solus zos Galvus: Now, if you have no further questions, I must be on my way.

Solus zos Galvus: Since we may not meet again in this lifetime, it would be remiss of me not to offer a word or two of gratitude.

Solus zos Galvus: I really must thank you for this surplus of vessels. I can mold any host into my own image, but having bodies tailor-made for me in this fashion is so much less tiresome!

Solus zos Galvus: You dabbled in Allagan cloning techniques, yes? It certainly is a compelling ─ not to mention entertaining ─ field of research.

Solus zos Galvus: And of all the options available, you chose the founding father on whom to experiment! You have a twisted streak to you, Varis. Like grandsire, like grandson, eh?

Solus zos Galvus: If events play out as planned, this will become something of a family enterprise.

Solus zos Galvus: You will be the capstone of this world; I, the anchor in the shard. And together, we will give the lie to this star’s fraudulent existence!

Solus zos Galvus: Well, of course it was! Though I will admit the resulting panic exceeded even my wildest expectations. But how can you be surprised? Throwing the world into disarray was the very purpose for which this nation was, as you say, “so carefully constructed.” Now, if you have no further questions, I must be on my way. Since we may not meet again in this lifetime, it would be remiss of me not to offer a word or two of gratitude. I really must thank you for this surplus of vessels. I can mold any host into my own image, but having bodies tailor-made for me in this fashion is so much less tiresome! You dabbled in Allagan cloning techniques, yes? It certainly is a compelling ─ not to mention entertaining ─ field of research. And of all the options available, you chose the founding father on whom to experiment! You have a twisted streak to you, Varis. Like grandsire, like grandson, eh? If events play out as planned, this will become something of a family enterprise. You will be the capstone of this world; I, the anchor in the shard. And together, we will give the lie to this star’s fraudulent existence!

[Solus exits, cackling madly.]

Quest: Parley on the Front Lines

Hien: We must leave now to convene with Eorzea’s leaders, and it may be some time before I return to Doma.  Hakuro ─ I leave you in command.

Hakuro: My lord!

Yugiri: I shall assemble an advance party with all haste, and join you in Ala Mhigo forthwith.

Alisaie: I’ve just received word from Lyse. The Alliance has established a base camp near Ala Mhigo’s northeastern border.  Once we’ve arrived in the Lochs, we’re to report to a Resistance officer stationed in Porta Praetoria who will point us in the right direction. Let’s not keep them waiting.

[In Ala Mhigo, the Lochs, at Porta Praetoria.]

Resistance Fighter: Ah, you must be the Scion party I was told to look out for! If you’ll follow me, I’ll take you directly to Alliance Headquarters.

[In the Alliance HQ]

Lyse: Welcome back, you two. Greetings, Lord Hien! Glad you could join us!

Hien: Glad to be here. I would have come sooner, were our own defenses not in question. But I am pleased to report that our soldiers are assembling for deployment to Ala Mhigo as we speak.

Raubahn: We are grateful for your support. Thanks to the efforts of our allies, it won’t be long before we’ve established defensive positions on this front as well.

Alisaie: Ahem, we have some good news too… Alphinaud has come back to us. As for the bad news…

[Alisaie explains the recent developments.]

Lyse: So, Alphinaud won’t wake up, Gaius van Baelsar is alive and hunting Ascians, and the Empire is planning to poison us all with toxic gas. Does that sound about right? Ordinarily, any one of those things would have left me in shock, but the way things have been lately, it’s all starting to seem pretty normal. Getting back to your report, are we sure this “Black Rose” is the weapon Maxima was talking about?

Raubahn: It fits the description. And it seems we have Alphinaud to thank for sparing us an early demonstration of its effectiveness. I’ve a feeling this won’t be the last time his bravery in the Empire will serve us here in Eorzea. The threat of an unknown weapon has had us all on edge… But now that we know what we’re dealing with, we can take steps to defend against it.  As for Gaius…I’m not sure what to think. Am I happy he’s alive? Not in the slightest. Am I happy he’s hunting Ascians? Aye. I’d have to say I am.

Lyse: Oh, speaking of Garleans-you-didn’t-expect-to-see, we have a tale of our own, as it happens. When we sent envoys to the imperial army to request talks, they returned with the message that “Varis zos Galvus” would be attending.

[Shocked looks all around.]

Hien: The Emperor himself? Well, Varis did sanction the Populares’ peace mission… …But knowing that an Ascian walks in his son’s skin, I do not see how we can trust him or anyone from that nest of vipers.

Raubahn: The Alliance would proceed with negotiations regardless, if only to give ourselves more time to prepare. We do, however, require your cooperation…

[Lyse turns to Alisaie.]

Lyse: Ah, right, yes… So…as a condition for the talks to go forward, the Empire has requested that a member of the Scions be present. There’ll be a representative from each Alliance nation, of course, but I’m afraid we have to ask that you come along too.

Alisaie: Gods, Lyse…you know how much I hate politics. But then what choice do I have? Alphinaud and the others aren’t going to do it…

[Alisaie thinks it over.]

Alisaie: Very well. I shall attend as the Scion’s representative.

[Lyse turns to the Warrior of Light.]

Lyse: In case you’re wondering why I didn’t ask you, the Empire also requested the presence of “Eorzea’s champion”…

[I’ll be there.][“I’m not fond of politics either…”]

Lyse: Oh, you’re not, are you? Come on. If Alisaie can put on a brave face, then so can you. Now, we don’t know what Varis means to bring to the table, or why he wants you there, but having you close at hand should make all the difference.

Raubahn: The meeting will take place on the border. Anticipating an early assault, we mean to position the bulk of our forces nearby.

Lyse: The Alliance leaders should already be on their way. Once you’re ready, we can head out and join them.  Well, I don’t suppose it’s polite to keep an emperor waiting too long. Shall we?

[At the parley table.]

[The Eorzean Alliance representatives await the Emperor’s appearance. Varis, his armor clanking, strides in and takes his seat.]

Varis zos Galvus: Esteemed representatives of the Eorzean Alliance ─ on behalf of the Garlean Empire, I thank you for inviting me here today.  As this parley was convened at your request, I invite you to speak first.

Nanamo Ul Namo: Very well, Your Radiance. I, Nanamo Ul Namo, seventeenth in the line of Ul, should be pleased to oblige you. As recent events in Ala Mhigo and Doma have made plain, the subjugation and exploitation of neighboring nations is not a sustainable policy. Should this day end in war, you may very well defeat us, but you will never extinguish the people’s desire for freedom. Though it may not be in our lifetime, there will be another revolution, another war, and the cycle will continue. Doma has entered into a concord with the nations of Eorzea. A partnership wherein we recognize one another as equals. Garlemald could be afforded similar treatment. You need only set aside your ambitions and join us in paving a path towards peace.

[Varis is amused.]

Varis zos Galvus: Hmph! You will not win me over with sophistry, Your Grace. As you know only too well, this alliance lacks the strength to keep the peace within its own borders. Even now, your struggles with the beastmen continue unabated. Divided, you sow this fertile soil with the seeds of your differences and reap naught but discord and chaos for your trouble. Eorzea must be united under one leader, one purpose. I would offer you both and bring an end to your strife.

Lyse: With all due respect, Your Radiance, the only that thing you offered the people of Ala Mhigo was fear and hopelessness.

Hien: The citizens of Doma can also attest to the meager alms of imperial rule. There is no purpose to be found in a life of oppression, each day more uncertain than the last.

Lyse: Our people are willing to die for their freedom. A great many already have. And countless more will, if we don’t put an end to this madness here and now.

[Varis considers this but is plainly unconvinced.]

Varis zos Galvus: We brought order and stability to your lives. This madness and bloodshed is of your own making. You broke the peace, not Garlemald.

Raubahn: Peace? Order? You kill our peoples, despoil our lands, take everything that is ours. And what? You expect us to lick the boot that grinds our faces into the dirt?

Varis zos Galvus: I expect you to weigh the costs. To recognize that countless lives have been lost on both sides in pursuit of a greater good ─ and to not squander all we have achieved in a fit of petulance.

Aymeric: Your Radiance, I fear I can personally attest to the dangers of pursuing one’s vision with such righteous fervor. For a thousand years, the Holy See of Ishgard waged war with dragons. A thousand years of sacrifice, of sorrow and hate, in which we bathed in the blood of friend and foe alike. Had it gone on any longer, we may well have drowned. Yet we have chosen to raise ourselves out of this bloody spiral, and have since made peace with our former enemy.

Varis zos Galvus: So I understand. No doubt the dragons were more receptive to your overtures in the wake of their leader’s demise. You speak of peace, yet use war to achieve it. Your father would not have bothered to obscure his intent with honeyed words. He understood that strength is all that matters in the end. Without his clarity of vision, I can but wonder what will become of Ishgard and her people. There was a time when Garlemald too lacked a leader of conviction. Weak and unable to wield magic, we were at the mercy of the strong, from whom we sought refuge in the bitter cold of the north. Were it not for the discovery of ceruleum, and the subsequent development of magitek, we might never have gained the power to take back that which was rightfully ours.

Merlwyb: You speak as if your people were the first to have been driven from their homes. Limsa Lominsa was built by wayward souls in search of a place to call their own. On the shores of Vylbrand we found it, and from those humble beginnings did we grow and flourish. And all without robbing our neighbors of their liberty.

Varis zos Galvus: So sayeth the pirate. Am I to believe that you simply asked the kobolds to yield up their lands, and that they were happy to oblige you? That you did not drive them out like rats in the hold of one of the many ships seized by your “privateers”?

[Merlwyb’s eyes narrow in displeasure.]

Varis zos Galvus: I will concede that, after centuries of exile, reclamation may be mistaken for invasion. Nevertheless, it is not ─ and those who till stolen soil have no right to object when cast out in turn.

Kan-E-Senna: Your uncompromising nature rivals that of the Ixal. They too lament circumstances which they themselves perpetuate. Were they but to embrace peace, we would welcome them with open arms. Indeed, some few have done just that, and now receive of the Twelveswood’s bounty. Would that your people might learn from their example.

[Varis laughs bitterly.]

Varis zos Galvus: You would dare compare us to the birdmen? You who thought to invoke the Twelve and threaten all of creation?

[Kan-E-Senna does not reply.]

Varis zos Galvus: I came here in the hope of finding some speck of common ground, but I see now these discussions will accomplish nothing. Despite what you people may believe, I am not wont to choose the sword over the olive branch. ‘Tis but a pity men are loath to accept one without first being shown the other.

Alisaie: Wait, I beg you! This meeting was supposed to be a chance to find a way forward together, not to bemoan the missteps which brought us here. Please ─ if you truly consider violence a last resort, there must be way we can come to an agreement.

Nanamo Ul Namo: As Mistress Alisaie says, we did not come here to bicker over the past, but to discuss how we might strive towards a brighter future.  Emperor Varis, may I suggest a short recess, that all present might compose themselves prior to beginning anew?

Varis zos Galvus: Very well. I pray this intermission will suffice to move these talks in a more constructive direction.

[Varis rises and stalks out of the room.]

Alisaie: Phew. This is really not my forte. After His Radiance’s little performance, it was all I could do not to swear at him. I honestly don’t know how I ended up playing the mediator. I just asked myself what Alphinaud would have done, tried my best to do the same, and…by some miracle, it worked. But there really is no common ground to be found with that man ─ nor do I think he looked for any. So the question becomes, what did he come here to do ─ because you may be certain it wasn’t to make peace. …Whatever it is, I can’t make it out ─ not yet, at least. We do have a little time before the parley is due to reconvene, though, so why not try consulting our illustrious leaders? Mayhap they have some insight to share.

[Hien and Aymeric are talking.]

Hien: This parley was never like to bring peace, but I had hoped to learn something of Emperor Varis’s relationship with the Ascians…

Aymeric: As had we all. Yet if he is in league with them, he is not like to volunteer the fact ─ and if he is not…how much weaker would his position seem for their presence. If we are to broach that particular subject, we will need to be subtle… Would that I knew more of the man… If you would indulge me, Lord Hien:  you received an imperial education, did you not? Is it true that the Emperor’s will is considered absolute?

Hien: There is no higher authority in all of Garlemald, nor else in the heavens, come to that. Veneration of the gods is forbidden ─ the only worship permitted being that of His Radiance’s own person.

[“That sounds suspiciously like a religion in itself.”][……]

Hien: I share your disdain for their hypocrisy. Even as they denigrate the idea of faith, they revere their leader with a fervor others reserve for the divine.  ‘Tis a flaw common to much of the doctrine they fed us ─ logical on the surface, perhaps, but contradictory upon closer examination. I wonder if a discussion of the various discrepancies might prompt Varis to reveal something…?

[Merlwyb and Kan-E-Senna are engaged in discussion.]

Merlwyb: I will say one thing for this Varis ─ he is well versed in Eorzean history.

Kan-E-Senna: His interest in our affairs is that of a beast in its prey. The conqueror would know his enemies.

Merlwyb: All should know their enemies. Yet there is much and more we do not know of the Empire.

[I’m sure Varis would be happy to tell you more…][“Then it’s up to us to change that. Here and now.”]

Merlwyb: Hah! You would have me ask the Emperor himself? Well, mayhap there is some wisdom in that.  If we can skirt the storm of his displeasure, we may yet come to our answers…even if it does mean sailing close to the wind.

[Lyse, Raubahn, and Nanamo are having a confab.]

Nanamo Ul Namo: Twelve have mercy… But for Lady Alisaie’s timely interjection, we might well have come to blows at the negotiating table.  Not that Emperor Varis left us a great many options. Is unconditional surrender all he will accept, do you think?

Raubahn: Ere he arrived, I’d have said yes. But having heard him speak…I cannot help but think he came with some other end in mind.

Lyse: Exactly! He’s building up to something, I know it!

Nanamo Ul Namo: Hmm… How then should we approach the rest of the parley? Have you anything to say, Warrior of Light?

[“Invite Varis to explain himself.”][Say nothing of Zenos or the Ascians.]

Nanamo Ul Namo: You believe he is more apt to reveal the truth if we put him at his ease? …Mayhap you are right.  Thank you, Auric.

Alisaie: You’ve spoken with everyone then? Good. Now, all that remains is to await the pleasure of the Emperor, and hope we fare better at the second attempt…

[Varis returns and reseats himself, still clanking.]

Varis zos Galvus: Now then. Who would have the floor?

Nanamo Ul Namo: Before we resume, I wish to offer you an apology. After you graciously accepted our invitation to discuss an armistice, we have done naught but rebuke you at every opportunity. I believe I speak for all of us when I say we are deeply sorry for our discourtesy.

Merlwyb: I’ll admit, your familiarity with our affairs surprised me ─ and served to remind me how little I know of yours.

Raubahn: I think all here can understand the desire to reclaim one’s homeland. But why expand further ─ that is my question.

Hien: If I may ─ the answer can be found in the imperial doctrine they took great pains to impart to my people. Recognizing the threat eikons pose to the world, Solus zos Galvus decreed that they were to be eradicated. To this end, he began a campaign to unite all lands under the Garlean banner. Or so we were taught. Yet the Emperor only reached the Burn ─ the barrens said to have been laid waste by eikons ─ after conquering all the lands that lay between. What is more, I am quite certain the practice of summoning was not nearly so widespread in the days before the Empire’s founding.

Lyse: When you put it like that, it all starts to sound like an excuse, doesn’t it? But to distract from what? Why are you really waging this war?

[Moths beat against the lights as the group awaits an answer. At last, Varis smiles.]

Varis zos Galvus: …Finally, you ask the right question. I can but hope you heed mine answer and at last accept the righteousness of our cause. My goal is this:  to return the world to the way it once was. The way it was always meant to be. In doing so, mankind will be made whole once more.

[Varis surveys the gathered leadership of the Eorzean Alliance.]

Varis zos Galvus: No longer will we suffer from the dissension born of our differences.  There will be but one race ─ a perfect race ─ as we were when time began.

Lyse: What in Rhalgr’s name are you talking about?

Varis zos Galvus: I am talking about the origins of this star. Of the Source, and its thirteen reflections. At the instant of the great sundering, ’twas not only the world that was shattered, but mankind itself. Thus were we divided into myriad races, each with its own unique imperfections. That is why man looks upon his neighbor and feels fear and hatred. Why he wages war. Why he kills his brother. You all in your own way have proven as much today. The peace you seek is but a fleeting solution to a fundamental problem. One which calls for more drastic measures. To bring about everlasting peace, our worlds must be rejoined. That is the goal the Empire would see realized ─ the glorious future unto which we shall one day shepherd mankind.

Merlwyb: A rejoining of worlds…?

Kan-E-Senna: I have heard this tale of the Source and its reflections before…

Nanamo Ul Namo: Are these not the selfsame desires as the Ascians?

Aymeric: Emperor Varis! Do not trust in their words. They will lead you to your doom.  My father thought to use them, but in the end he succumbed to their temptations. He embraced summoning like so many other pawns before him. Do not tell us you mean to do the same!

[Varis laughs bitterly.]

Varis zos Galvus: To be a pawn, free from the burden of choice, would be a blessing….  But I foreswore that privilege the day I learned that the Garlean Empire was built by the hand of an Ascian.

Alisaie: What!?

Varis zos Galvus: Yes. My grandsire, the former emperor, is of their number. And who better to build an empire capable of bringing about the calamitous change we desire?  Would you condemn me for this alliance, for bowing to the will of these shadowy masters, when the prize is true and lasting peace?

[“Your prize is a lie. Your master, demons.”][I will stop you and the Ascians. No matter the cost.]

[Varis rises to his feet, voice rising with increasing fervor.]

Varis zos Galvus: I come not to conquer, but to liberate ─ to free man from the prison of divergence. Imagine a world united. One perfect race beneath a single standard. An army before whose might these servants of Darkness and Light would fly as leaves in a storm, never again to meddle in man’s affairs. We would be the masters of our own fate! I bid you join me! Not as subjects of Garlemald, but of a new nation! And together we shall win freedom for ourselves and generations yet unborn!

[Lyse stands up.]

Lyse: You want to trigger another half-dozen calamities? You can’t be serious!

[Raubahn remembers the battle at Cartenau and also rises to his feet.]

Raubahn: Have you forgotten how many died? There will be no one left!

[Merlwyb rises next.]

Merlwyb: Do you truly imagine we would aid you in your bloodletting?

[Kan-E-Senna joins the others on their feet.]

Kan-E-Senna: It is unthinkable! Unconscionable!

[The rest of the Eorzean alliance rise in unison.]

Varis zos Galvus: And what is the alternative? To be as cattle waiting for slaughter. I would have us work together, that we might take fate into our own hands.

Alisaie: Into your hands, perhaps…

[Alisae recalls the Warriors of Darkness.]

Alisaie: But what of the other worlds, Your Radiance? With every calamity, you obliterate a star and every soul that dwells on it!

Varis zos Galvus: To the Ascians, we are all but tiny, momentary specks within an indifferent universe. We cannot hope to oppose them until we have been made whole once more.

Nanamo Ul Namo: Are these truly the words of Garlemald’s ruler? The flaws and foibles which you so abhor are what make us who we are. Every nation ─ even yours, Emperor Varis ─ is made whole through the combination of these imperfections, the strengths of one compensating for the weaknesses of another. While it is true that man succumbs all too often to anger and avarice, he may yet overcome his baser instincts through the forming of bonds with others, fostering community and cooperation. That the protector of an empire should not only reject these fundamental truths, but seek to change them at so dear a cost to life is indefensible. Such a man is not fit to govern.

Varis zos Galvus: And you, Warrior of Light? Would you refuse me as well?

[“I cannot condone such a loss of life.”][We can defeat the Ascians as we are.]

[The rest of the Eorzean Alliance representatives look at each other and nod in agreement.]

Nanamo Ul Namo: It would seem the Alliance is of one mind on this matter.

Varis zos Galvus: You Eorzeans never cease to disappoint me. Though I suppose I have only myself to blame for expecting more from savages. This discussion is at an end. I bid you make ready for our next meeting. It will not be at the negotiating table.

[Varis rises and strides out of the room.  The Alliance leave by the other door.]

[Outside the parley tent.]

Lyse: I came back to find Doma’s advance party ready and waiting for battle. So, as worrying as our little chat with the Emperor was, it did buy enough time for at least some of our allies to arrive.

Quest: The Face of War

[There’s hustle and bustle in the forward camp as the troops make preparations for the battle soon to start.]

Lyse: I’m not sure what I was expecting from our meeting with the Emperor, but it wasn’t that. Still, at least we know now what he’s really after!

Raubahn: Aye, a future built on a mountain of bodies. I too want the Ascians dead ─ but not at any cost.

Hien: The last of the reinforcements from Doma arrived not long ago. I pray it will be enough. Given the Emperor’s stated goal, this is a battle we can ill afford to lose.

Raubahn: If the Garleans come in force, we may not have much say in the matter…even with our combined strength.

Hien: We knew from the first that the odds would be against us. But if there is even the slightest chance of victory, we must do everything in our power to seize it.

Raubahn: We must seize it, full stop.

Hien: Hear hear!

[Raubahn turns to Alisaie and the Warrior of Light.]

Raubahn: The two of you are to join an irregular unit and support the main host. I won’t bother asking if you’re minded to fight.

Alisaie: After coming this far, how could I not? And for once, there’s no one around to countermand me. Not that they would. Not even my brother. But we all know who’ll really make the difference. Ready to frighten some Garleans?

Raubahn: I wouldn’t want to be on their side.

Hien: Might I ask you to accompany the Doman contingent? They are strangers here, and your presence would do much to raise their spirits.

Alisaie: We would be honored.

Yugiri: When our people stride out with you in their midst, I daresay the Eorzeans will feel an ilm taller themselves. High spirits have a way of spreading.

Raubahn: Ah, what I wouldn’t give to join you. But my duties as field commander will not allow it. I leave the front lines in your capable hands.

[Raubahn speaks to the assembled forces.]

Raubahn: Comrades! Ready your arms! The hour of battle has come!  May the Crystal guide us to victory!

[The fighters cheer, and scatter in all directions to attend to their duties.]

[Alisaie turns to the Warrior of Light.]

Alisaie: Since the others couldn’t be here, we’ll have to fight twice as hard. If Alphinaud wakes to find the imperials have won, I shall never hear the end of it. It’s strange… I thought I would be terrified when the fighting started. I should be terrified. But with you at our side, I can’t help feeling everything is going to be all right. So please… Don’t you dare leave me alone. No matter what happens, we have to survive. Together.

DUNGEON: THE GHIMLYT DARK

Alisaie: There you are! And none the worse for wear!

Hien: Indeed. I had hoped we might do more to help, but there seems to be no one left to fight.

Yugiri: A tactical withdrawal, perhaps?

Alisaie: We should give chase. Finish them off while we have the chance.  Imagine the others’ surprise when they wake to find the war already won.

[As if on cue, The Call comes again.]

Mysterious Voice: The Light…will expunge all life… Only you…can forestall the calamity…Throw wide…the gates…

Alisaie: No! Not now… Not…like…

[Alisaie reaches out for the Warrior of Light, who stretches to catch her hand. But it’s too late — Alisaie falls to the ground, unconscious.]

Hien: Oh no, don’t tell me…  Are you all right?

[The Warrior of Light nods.]

Hien: Quickly! We must get her back to the encampment.

[Back at the Alliance camp.]

Raubahn: So the Garleans have been routed, have they? Well done. Though this exchange was no more than a test of our strength, like as not. They won’t be taking any chances now that the Emperor has joined the fray. They’ll want to take their time ─ whittle down our defenses… Still, with your help, and that of our Eastern allies, we’ve passed the first test. Our line is unbroken. As for Alisaie…well, she’s in good hands over at the infirmary.

Yugiri: My lord ─ the chirurgeons have completed their examination of Mistress Alisaie, and it is as we feared. She is locked in a slumber without any outward cause.

Hien: Just like the others. Damn it all…

Raubahn: Aye…the Garleans picked a fine time to come knocking.  Five Scions incapacitated… And with the enemy on our doorstep, I cannot spare the men to assist in the search for a cure. The best I can do is see to it that Alisaie is escorted safely back to the Rising Stones.

Hien: Yugiri and I would return to our encampment. The main contingent of our forces from the Far East is under sail, and all must be made ready for their arrival.

Raubahn: I’ll not keep you, then.

[Hien and Yugiri head off.]

Raubahn: Judging by the Garleans’ recent movements, or lack thereof, they won’t be launching another offensive in the immediate future.  You should return to the Rising Stones. Given the plight of your fellow Scions, I can understand if you feel on edge, but you’ll be no good to anyone without rest.

[Back at the Rising Stones]

Hoary Boulder: Ah, Auric. Welcome home. Word has it you and Mistress Alisaie gave the Garleans quite a thrashing. Speaking of whom, where is Mistress Alisaie? I was certain she would have returned by now.

[Hoary Boulder is brought up to speed.]

Hoary Boulder: By the Twelve, not her too… Ocher and I will ready the infirmary for her arrival. We will also need to send a message to Tataru posthaste. Would that I had something other than grim tidings to share with her… And with you too, for that matter. It grieves me to report that the Archons’ condition remains unchanged. As we speak, Coultenet, Krile, and Master Matoya continue to explore every possible avenue. Alas, their efforts have yet to bear fruit. But all is not lost. You are still hale and whole, after all. Though I suspect you must be tired from your journey. You should rest, my friend. Leave the worrying to us, for the time being, at least.

[Meanwhile, at the border of Ala Mhigo.]

[Lord “Zenos” has arrived to take command of the Imperial troops.]

Patch 4.56: A Requiem For Heroes (Part 2)

Quest: A Brief Reprieve

[Hoary Boulder is waiting in the Rising Stones.]

Hoary Boulder: Ah, Auric. Yours is a welcome face indeed in these troubled times. Though if you’ve come to inquire about our stricken brothers and sisters, I am afraid I have naught to report.  Coultenet and the others continue their tireless search for answers, and I too have done all in my power to assist them. Alas…

[The door to the outside opens.]

???: My apologies for the intrusion. I was told Master Alphinaud had been brought here, and wished to see if his condition had improved.

[It’s Maxima, the former Garlean soldier, with one of his men.]

Maxima: Master Auric. I have heard about the part you played in driving back the Empire’s forces……Thank you. That you were able to stop them, if only for a short while, gives me hope. I realize how strange such words must sound coming from a Garlean’s lips, but I speak them out of the love I bear for my homeland ─ because I wish to see an end to the bloodshed. That is why I chose to share all that I know with the Alliance. Though I will surely be branded a traitor, I am content to bear that ignominy. ‘Twill seem a small price to pay if it helps to prevent this conflict from escalating any further. But enough of my prattling. The war is not what brought me all this way. I came to see Master Alphinaud.

Hoary Boulder: An acquaintance of Auric and Alphinaud, are you? Well, far be it from me to turn away good company. If you will follow me, sir…

[Hoary Boulder leads the way to the sickroom.]

[Later, after Maxima’s visit.]

Maxima: When word reached me that Alphinaud had returned, it seemed only right that I visit him. Poor lad… It pains me to see him thus. But I take solace in the knowledge that he is safe and well cared for. He fought valiantly at the Burn. The Populares could not have wished for a more committed ally. I know not how he came to be so afflicted, but I pray a cure will be found soon. On an unrelated note, you may be interested to know that I traveled here in the company of another acquaintance of yours. He awaits my return at north Silvertear, and I am certain he would be glad to see you. Assuming you can spare the time, that is.

[On the shore of Silvertear Lake. Cid’s airship, the Excelsior, is docked there. ]

Maxima: Ah, there you are. I was beginning to think you would not come.

[Cid disembarks.]

Cid: It sounds like you’ve been through the mill. You should have called me. Though I must confess, tracking down missing souls isn’t exactly within my field of expertise.

Maxima: As you may have surmised, I heard much of Master Garlond growing up in Garlemald. Indeed, he has long been a source of inspiration to me.  Most Garleans would say he is a traitor, that he turned his back on his country. We of the Populares, however, consider him a revolutionary ─ a man willing to defy the Empire’s dreams of subjugation, that his inventions might bring about a better future for all mankind.

Cid: Please ─ “revolutionary” is a term best reserved for my work. I am but an imperial defector who thought to aid another imperial defector.

Maxima: Whatever Master Garlond says, I am humbled to find myself in such distinguished company.

Cid: Speaking of distinguished company, we heard from Raubahn that you ran into an old friend in the Burn. Is it true? Gaius still lives?

Maxima: Like most in the army, I never had the privilege of seeing the legatus without his mask. To think I walked halfway across the Burn in the presence of the Black Wolf…

Cid: And he claimed to have severed ties with the Empire to hunt Ascians, did he?  Should we meet again, I shall be sure to tell him so.

Maxima: Commander Aldynn also spoke of the Alliance’s meeting with the Emperor…though I still labor to believe what he told us. Did His Radiance really claim that Garlemald was founded by the Ascians?

[The Warrior of Light nods.]

Maxima: But that is madness. The very notion is absurd! Every fiber of my being rails against it… And yet I see there is no escaping the truth. From the very founding of my homeland, my brothers and sisters have laid down their lives in service to a lie.  The Ascians must be stopped. To save my people, to save all peoples.

Cid: For all the Empire’s many crimes, even I did not suspect. Had I known, I would have left a lot sooner. But that is in the past. Here in the present, we must apply ourselves to the problem of how the Empire’s ambitions may be thwarted, not only in Eorzea, but in the Far East as well. The Ironworks will spare no effort to achieve that end. Seiryu’s Wall was a good start, but we can do more ─ and we will. We’ll show them what it means to achieve “Freedom through Technology”!

[An Alliance Herald runs up.]

Alliance Herald: Begging your pardons! I bear a message for the Warrior of Light!  Commander Aldynn requests your presence at Alliance Headquarters in Ala Mhigo. He would discuss matters of strategy at your earliest convenience.

Cid: Ah yes. The inevitable messenger. I knew it wouldn’t be long before duty called you away.  Time no doubt being of the essence, could I tempt you to a ride aboard the Excelsior? If there’s a faster way to Raubahn’s side, I will personally apologize to the commander for keeping him waiting.

[At Porta Praetoria, in the Lochs of Ala Mhigo.]

Cid: I swear, every time you board my airship, you seem to be barreling headlong into danger. And every time, you somehow contrive to emerge victorious. Which, of course, is an admirable skill.  But no one is invincible, Auric. Not even you. So please, take care of yourself out there.

Maxima: I pray you remain safe on the front lines. Though ill-equipped to join the fray, I shall do all I can to assist from headquarters.

Cid: My colleagues and I have been tasked with evacuating casualties by air. See that you aren’t among them, eh?

Quest: A Requiem for Heroes

Resistance Fighter: Commander Aldynn is waiting, sir. It would be best if we proceeded to Alliance Headquarters at once.

[Inside the Alliance HQ. Raubahn waits at the strategy table.]

Raubahn: You’re here. Good. I summoned you to discuss strategy, but first I would apprise you of the Garleans’ movements. There have been several skirmishes along the border, but as yet, neither side has delivered a decisive blow. We had long assumed that the Garleans would overwhelm us in a straight fight, but we seem to be gaining ground, albeit slowly. As to why that might be… The most likely explanation is that they have yet to commit all their forces. Still, we’re winning, and our latest intelligence suggests the Emperor has retreated back to Garlemald. In light of this, we’re considering launching an offensive, with the aim of pushing the front line forward, and giving ourselves some room to breathe.

[An Ala Mhigan infantryman runs up.]

Distressed Soldier: Commander! The imperials ─ they’ve broken through our defenses to the east.

Raubahn: What!?

Distressed Soldier: Our scouts say their forces are being led by Lord Zenos!  Lord Hien and Commander Hext have taken their troops to provide support, but we don’t know how long they can hold out.

Raubahn: So they’ve been biding their time, waiting for his arrival, have they? Very well. Send word to our allies, requesting reinforcements for the front line. Should the worst come to the worst, I may need to enter the fray myself. But what of you? Do you still have the strength to fight?

[“You need only say the word.”][As long as you leave the Ascian to me.]

Raubahn: Much obliged. Given the choice, I’d take you over a hundred soldiers.

[Suddenly the Call strikes again!]

Mysterious Voice: Why won’t they open?  Please…I bid you, open!

[The Warrior of Light falls to his knees.]

Raubahn: What’s wrong? Is it the voice again?

[The Warrior of Light nods.]

Raubahn: Are you sure you’re in a fit state to do this?

[The Warrior of light nods once again.]

Raubahn: May Rhalgr grant us strength… Give them hell, lad. I, for my part, will defend this place to my dying breath.

[Meanwhile, at the border of Ala Mhigo, Hien, Lyse, Yugiri and a few alliance troops face down “Zenos” — or rather, Elidibus in Zenos’ body.]

[Roleplay as Hien! The goal:  to delay “Zenos” until the Warrior of Light arrives.]

Zenos yae Galvus: So, there are still those would stand before me ─ before Zenos… Interesting.

Lyse: Let’s put an end to this here and now!

Zenos yae Galvus: Do you truly believe that possible? Then let us test the limits of this Garlean vessel.

Yugiri Mistwalker: A formidable foe… But we have come too far to fail now.

Zenos yae Galvus: Soon I shall give the lie to man’s indomitable spirit.

Hien: To be battered and beaten here…Auric would never let us hear the end of it.

[The warriors converge on “Zenos,” seeking an opening, but the faux Garlean is unshaken.]

Zenos yae Galvus: Fight and struggle if that is your wont, but you will not escape your fate.

Hien: Our fate is not for you to decide!

Zenos yae Galvus: Enough! You will learn your place.  Behold ─ a taste of my true power!

[“Zenos” binds Hien in blood red magic tendrils.]

Hien: Grrr… Ngh… What is this sorcery!?

Zenos yae Galvus: Look upon Ame-no-Habakiri and know the depths of your folly!

Lyse: Oh no you don’t!

[Lyse shoulder-checks Hien out of the trap, taking his place in the center of the tendril net.]

Hien: Lyse, no… What have you done!?

Yugiri Mistwalker: If he would bring all to bear then so must we!

[Yugiri uses her Ninjitsu magic to destroy the source of the magic net.]

Hien: Well done dispelling his phantoms. Now hurry, we must protect Lyse!

Zenos yae Galvus: Still you choose to struggle against the inevitable…

Hien: We may be on the back foot, but it’s not over yet!

Lyse: If we can at least hold out until Auric arrives, I’m sure we can turn this around.

Zenos yae Galvus: He comes, does he? Then I need not waste any more time with you.

Yugiri: Fall, fiend!

[“Zenos” backhands Yugiri and she falls hard.]

Hien: Yugiri!

[Hien’s attack is also effortlessly repelled.]

[Lyse launches herself at “Zenos” and strikes a solid blow that cracks his mask, revealing a blue eye, but “Zenos” fells her with a blast of shadow magic from his hand.]

Hien: Magic? With a Garlean body? That’s hardly fair… Still, he must be stopped…no matter the cost…

[Hien tries to rise to his feet, but stumbles and falls again.]

[The Warrior of Light dashes onto the field of battle at last.]

Zenos: Ah, Bringer of Light. It has been too long.

The Warrior of Light stares “Zenos” down.]

Zenos: No words to mark our reunion? …So be it.  Equilibrium must be restored… And only your death will redress the balance.

Zenos yae Galvus: We will suffer your interference no longer. You think you know of the dark, but I will show you the true nature of our power! The potential of this vessel is transcendent ─ without limit! You are strong, Bringer of Light, but Her blessing will avail you not. To redress the balance ─ to ensure the salvation of this star ─ you must fall!

[The Warrior of Light does not fall.]

Zenos yae Galvus: Impossible… How is it you have grown so powerful in the gift!?  No matter… You may have bested Lahabrea, but I will not be cast aside so easily!

[After a long fight, “Zenos” falls…]

[…only to rise again a moment later in a swirl of purple and red light.]

Zenos: Your Mother chose Her champion well. Yet for all your strength, you will still fail.

[“Zenos” slams the Warrior of Light backward with a heavy hit. The Warrior grits his teeth and charges back into the fray –but then — the Call.]

Mysterious Voice: Please…I beseech you

[The Warrior falls to one knee, gasping.]

Zenos: Hm? Someone calls to you… Too late, alas.

[“Zenos” strides forward and lifts his katana.  The Warrior stares up at him, his vision swirling with the distortion of the Call.]

[The sword descends.]

[Darkness.]

[Then light.  The Warrior opens his eyes. He is standing on a circular platform of light that floats in a starless void.  The platform is marked with patterns of circles and lines.]

???: At last, I’ve found you.

[The Warrior turns. A male figure wearing a red, black, and white hooded cowl and holding a staff, stands on the platform behind him. What can be seen of the face is pale, but there is what looks like blue and brown crystallization on the neck, cheek, and the right hand which holds the staff.]

Enigmatic Figure: Please! There is no cause for alarm! …Though, I confess, this is not where I had intended to meet. But the place of our meeting is of no consequence ─ like the war you wage. Win or lose, the path you walk leads only to oblivion. The better path leads you here. To me. I have need of your strength.

[Who are you?!] [“You have to send me back, now!”]

Enigmatic Figure: The battle is over. The danger passed. But your work is not yet done. Go to the Crystal Tower. I have left something for you near its base. It will serve as a beacon of sorts. One which I pray will help you on your journey. All you need do is find it. I will take care of the rest.

[The figure holds out his uncrystallized left hand.]

Enigmatic Figure: Soon we will throw wide the gates… And the path to the First will be yours to walk at last.

[Darkness again.]

[The Warrior awakes, blearily, in an unfamiliar room of Ishgardian style, on a bed.  He sits up. A  young Ishgardian, apparently watching for this, darts out of the room.  Through the open door, Ser Aymeric appears.]

Aymeric: You’re awake. Thank heavens!

[Aymeric sits in a chair by the bed.]

[“What happened?”] [Where is Zenos?]

Aymeric: Do you recall the confrontation with Zenos? You were the first to come to the aid of Mistress Lyse and the others on the front line. In the midst of your duel, it is said you faltered, and that the crown prince seized the opportunity to deliver a mortal blow. Yet before his blade could find its mark, he was distracted by the arrival of a second adversary who bore you away from the battlefield and into the hands of our chirurgeons. Lest you wonder, he left before you awoke. As is his wont.

[Flashback:  Estinien delivers the unconscious Warrior of Light to Aymeric.]

Aymeric: Estinien never was one for emotional farewells. Though Zenos bested all before him, the battle clearly took its toll, for he retreated shortly after your rescue. Seeing this, the remaining imperial forces decided discretion was the better part of valor and pulled back, allowing us to reestablish our position. We have since received word of renewed unrest in the provinces, doubtless inspired by the efforts of the Eorzean Alliance and our Far Eastern allies. Nor does the good news end there. We have also come into possession of intelligence suggesting unrest within the imperial court. This would certainly explain why both the Emperor and Lord Zenos appear to have abandoned the fight. A long-awaited ray of hope in these dark times.

[The Warrior frowns.]

[“Is Alisaie all right?”] [What of the Scions?]

Aymeric: Yet to awake, I’m afraid. But, please…concentrate on your own recovery for now. You have carried the hopes of some half-dozen nations ─ and we are all eternally grateful for your efforts ─ but no one is without their limits. Not even you. Leave this fight to us, my friend. You have earned your rest. Ah, but before I forget… I was asked to deliver a message as soon as you awoke. A reminder that you are not alone, though many of your allies have fallen. When you are well and rested, you are to return home, where friends will be waiting for you. Now, if you will excuse me, I must return to the front. May we meet again soon. Under happier circumstances.

[The Warrior of Light steps out of the room into the hall.]

???: Well, this is a most unexpected surprise. I thought you confined to bed.

[Count Edmont de Fortemps is there.]

Count Edmont de Fortemps: When I heard that you had collapsed on the field of battle, I confess I feared the worst. But with you standing here before me, I see now that the reports of your defeat were greatly exaggerated. Thank the Fury. As long as we have you, Master Seagard, history suggests we have a fighting chance. Speaking of fighting, you may be surprised to hear that the war’s effects can already be felt even here in Ishgard. In anticipation of a need for reinforcements, Artoirel will soon be departing for the front lines with a contingent of our finest knights. I would advise you to stay until your strength had returned, but I know it would be an exercise in futility. Indeed, I suspect you have already decided on your next destination. Dark days lie ahead, of that I have no doubt, but the light of hope shall ever guide our steps so long as we have the will to press onward. And press onward we must. Farewell, my friend. I pray our next meeting will be under happier circumstances.

[The Warrior of Light leaves Ishgard and heads to the Rising Stones in Mor Dhona.]

[The remaining Scions, including Tataru, are in the common room. Tataru is delighted to see the Warrior of Light walk in. She rushes up, her eyes brimming with tears.]

Tataru: By the Twelve, I don’t believe it!  I rushed back as soon as I could. I swear, my heart nearly stopped when I heard you’d collapsed like the others. What in heavens’ name is going on?

[The Warrior of Light fills everyone in.]

Tataru: “Win or lose, the path you walk leads only to oblivion.” …Well, that’s helpful. And what else did he say? The better path leads to him? Hmm… If his is the voice you’ve all been hearing, perhaps the others are with him. Ser Aymeric said the fighting had reached a stalemate, didn’t he. But if that monster masquerading as Zenos comes back… Thancred, Y’shtola, Urianger, Alphinaud, Alisaie…You’re going to need all of them on your side to defeat him. And I forbid you from going to face him on your own. Do you hear me? So if you must leave… Go and find the others. Bring them home.

[The Warrior of Light nods solemnly. Tataru smiles and wipes her eyes.]

Tataru: As for where to start, you said the stranger had left a beacon for you at the Crystal Tower, right? But how are you to find it now that the tower has been sealed shut? There has to be a way… If anyone would know, it’s Cid and the researchers of Saint Coinach’s Find. Don’t you worry. We’ll find that beacon for you.

[The remaining Scions cheer.]

[Meanwhile, in the Imperial Palace…]

[“Zenos” confronts Garlean Emperor Varis zos Galvus in the Imperial throne room.]

Zenos: …I pray you have good reason for abandoning the front.

Varis zos Galvus: How could I remain there while the rumor that my son is possessed by a demon spreads like a sickness here at home? I will not be made to fight for the throne a second time. But what of you? Did you not tell me you would destroy Eorzea’s champion with the ease that one might swat a fly?

[“Zenos” looks away.]

Zenos yae Galvus: A minor setback. He will not escape me again.  Where is your grandsire? I would have words with him.

Varis zos Galvus: How should I know? Do you hide from each other’s sight as well? I imagine he is doing what all Ascians do.

Zenos yae Galvus: Hmmm… He must have found a way to take advantage of this turmoil.

Varis zos Galvus: Men are not pawns to be played with, Ascian. You underestimate us at your peril.  This war will not be decided by you and yours. Man must choose his own fate, and I for my part will do all within my power to see Garlemald emerge victorious.

[“Zenos” turns and walks away without a word. Varis stares at his throne in silence.]

[An Elezen in a white lab coat enters.]

Imperial Magitek Engineer: Pray forgive the intrusion, Your Radiance, but the requested preparations are now complete.  We stand ready to begin production of Black Rose, upon your order.

[Varis stares at the Garlean banner over his throne for a moment.]

[Then he smiles  — a truly terrifying expression.]

[Back at the Waking Stones, Tataru has a parting gift — new clothes!]

Tataru: I knew you’d be all right. And to celebrate your return, I made you this ─ a brand-new traveling outfit! Oh, I do hope it fits… But now is not the time to fuss over your measurements. I must go and speak with the researchers of Saint Coinach’s Find. You go and rest while we track down that beacon.

[At the site of the battle with “Zenos.”]

[The mysterious blue-eyed Elezen in Alliance soldier garb, last seen stealing an Imperial scout vessel, stares around at the carnage.  For a moment his eyes glow bright red with the geometric patterns of the Resonance. Unlike Fordola, both of his eyes are marked.]

Katana-wielding Soldier: My enemy. My friend. Had I been but a step faster…

[An Imperial soldier spots the mysterious Elezen and charges.]

Imperial Centurion: Bloody savages!

[The Elezen in Alliance uniform cuts him down with one strike of his katana, and  dismisses the body from his mind without a second thought.]

Katana-wielding Soldier: A pity your hunt leads you elsewhere… Not that I am surprised.  May you find joy in it. Grow stronger, more savage, and savor every triumph…

[He stares at a Garlean banner flapping in the wind.]

Katana-wielding Soldier: In the meantime…I will reclaim that which is rightfully mine.

[Back in Mor Dhona, the Warrior of Light strides up to the base of the Crystal Tower spire, and looks thoughtfully up at it.]